[Language: en]

Welcome to full stack AI DevOps
masterclass with microservices. And
before I begin, I want you all to drop
your attendance in the comment section
of this particular video. This will help
me gauge the kind of response that this
kind of content brings in. And also, if
you find this particular video to be
valuable, which you can find which you
can you can discover the value from the
timestamps that I have added in the
description. Okay? So, if you find this
video valuable, be sure to hit like,
subscribe, and let me know in the
comments that you found this content to
be valuable. It just makes me happy. So,
what is this content all about? And by
the way, before I begin talking about
this video,
a lot of viewers are not subscribing.
Okay? So, I I don't know I get a lot of
views from
like people who are not subscribed.
Okay? This is what YouTube Analytics
tells me. And I don't know why people
are not subscribing.
Maybe because I thought my content is
not valuable. But then I realized there
are a lot more of you who are also
returning viewers. Okay? So, if you're
returning to the channel, it means you
all are finding the content valuable.
Okay? But not subscribing, I don't know
why. Okay? So, hit that subscribe
button, turn on the bell notification
icon, and let's talk about this video.
So,
this particular course, like the name
says, it's a full stack AI DevOps
masterclass. Now, why full stack?
Because here we work with full stack
applications. And AI as in there are
some AI strategies, like AI-assisted
DevOps. I have some strategies
inside the course that helps you
accelerate your DevOps workflow. Okay?
So, hence the word AI. I And yes, it's a
DevOps masterclass, and anyone can take
this particular masterclass, whether you
are a DevOps engineer or a developer who
is willing to understand DevOps. Okay?
And yes, we also cover microservices
over here. So, full stack as in we deal
with full stack applications and
microservices. So, there are full stack
microservices
that we deal with, okay? And yes, this
is what the course covers entirely. So,
we start with the DevOps mindset, okay?
So, see, this course is for beginners,
like I said. Even beginners can take,
experienced professionals can take. I
have timestamps clearly mentioned in the
description section. So, if you feel
like skipping a part, you can do that.
But, this course starts with the ultra
basics. So, if you are a beginner who
don't know what DevOps is, who has not
heard terms like Docker, Kubernetes,
what is Kubernetes in cloud, what is
IAC, okay? That's infrastructure as
code. I'll talk about that. GCP, AWS,
Azure, what is all of this? Okay, so if
that's the case,
then [snorts]
do this course is for you. We start with
literal basics, okay? We start with
like, what is a DevOps mindset, what
DevOps is. So, we literally start from
there. And we graduate to understand all
these concepts. And not only we learn
these concepts theoretically, so I have
minimized a lot of theory in this
particular course. It's hands-on
practical. You get access to a
production grade application that you
learn how to containerize, deploy in
Kubernetes, Kubernetes on cloud. All of
that you learn over here. Okay? So, it's
fully hands-on. It's like a workshop
that you are doing or you are enrolling
in. Okay? So, so that's how the course
is designed and we we start with Docker.
We containerize the application. So,
first we start with DevOps and
understand the integrity of DevOps, then
Docker. Then we learn Kubernetes. And
then we learn how you can
make your application run on Kubernetes
in cloud. So, first this Kubernetes part
is understanding Kubernetes and running
it locally. And deploying applications
as well locally. And then we take our
applications to cloud. And then we learn
what is infrastructure as code using
Terraform, okay? So, this is gaining a
lot of popularity these days and it's
important that you as a developer or a
DevOps engineer understand this. Also,
uh this is very rare. Okay, GCP, Azure,
and AWS covered all in one course. This
is very rare. Okay, I could not find a
good course that covers all these three
cloud platforms. These are major cloud
platforms. Okay, that is being used by
enterprises, startups, everyone. Okay,
so if you know these three, you win.
Right? And it's I believe it's important
you should have knowledge of all three
cloud platforms. Okay, you should be
expert you can be expert in one or two,
but have knowledge of all three because
see, today you are working in company A
or project A, you might be shifted to
project B and that client might be
wanting some other cloud provider.
Right? You might switch jobs and that
company is using let's say some other
cloud provider.
So, it's best to know like all the
platforms, but be expert in one or two.
That's what I recommend. Okay, so this
is how the course flow. I am not going
to take a lot of time here, okay,
because I believe my content speaks for
itself. Okay. So, this is a very
comprehensive course. Do watch till the
very end. I hope you all have marked
your attendance and let me know in
comments what sort of videos I should
bring more on this channel.
And where are you from or what is your
what are your goals? Why are you
watching this video and where are you
watching this from? Like I said, the
city, state, you mention that the
country. Okay. So, I would be happy to
see your message and of course I'll be
replying to everyone whoever I can.
Okay, I get a lot of comments. I try to
reply as much as I can and I'll give my
best shot there. Right? So, so yes, if
you have not subscribed last time, okay,
please hit that subscribe button and
like the video and share it with your
friends whoever needs this. Okay,
sharing is also important. Sharing is
caring. This is a free tutorial that we
are sharing here. Okay, if you find this
valuable, do share it with your friends.
Hey there. So, it's time I thought I
should share some useful resources that
can enhance your learning experience.
So, first is this
GitHub repository. Okay, there are uh uh
two, three uh resources that I want to
share. First is the GitHub repository.
And this is the official GitHub
repository of this particular course.
And what you can do is you can clone
this repository onto your machine. And
uh as you start taking the course, you
will realize you have all the files that
are needed
uh that can uh help you save time and
make sure you follow the course in the
right way. Okay? So, all the files are
provided over here. And also, if you
scroll down here, you have the learning
road map and uh access uh to our road
map which can uh help you become a
full-stack uh uh developer. Okay? So,
you can refer to this road map as well.
Also, here if you check the branches,
there are two branches you will see. One
is the main branch. So, we start with
main branch. And if you find uh
if you want to access something, or if
you want to see what I what I wrote in a
particular lecture, you have another
branch which is the working branch. And
uh this working branch has all the uh
source code written by me in the
lectures. Okay? So, while recording the
videos, whatever uh source code I've
written is on this particular branch.
And this main branch is the starting
point of the course. So, you actually
need access to main branch. But if you
are stuck and want to compare my source
code that I've written, you don't need
to type everything out. You can switch
to working branch and just see what I've
done.
All right. So, now is the time that we
begin talking about what DevOps exactly
is. So, we are going to understand what
DevOps is and the problem it solves and
will also uh break some misconception
about DevOps. So, I'm going to paste
something over here, I'll something over
here. Okay. So, what is DevOps first of
all? DevOps is a way of building and
operating software where development and
operations work together. Okay? And what
does development mean? Yes, it's the
development team. What does operations
mean? It's the operations of the
software or the application that you're
building. What comes under operations
and all? We're going to discuss that
shortly. And if you're not aware of what
operations means, don't worry. Okay,
we'll cover that shortly. But for now,
DevOps is a way of building and
operating software where development and
operations work together. And this
happens usually with shared
responsibility to ship features faster
and safer and more reliably. Okay? And
there is also automation that is being
involved. So, shared responsibility and
automation that is
being involved over here. Now, one thing
I would want to mention over here that
DevOps is not a tool, but it's a
culture, a practice, and you can call it
a workflow as well. Okay? So, there are
different tools out in the market like
Docker, Kubernetes, CI/CD,
you know,
you have Spring Boot. So, it's not a
tool.
Okay, it's a culture, practice, and a
workflow. Okay? So, putting together, a
DevOps actually is a culture which is
which brings shared ownership. It is a
set of practices. So, basically
implementing CI/CD tools, infrastructure
as code, monitoring tools, and having a
workflow in place where in you plan,
build,
deploy, test, operate, and improve.
Okay? So, that is what DevOps is. Now,
let us go a little bit further and let
us also try to understand like what
Why DevOps first of all came into
picture? Okay? So, what I'm going to do
is I'm going to add something over here.
Okay? And I'm going to cover the before
part of the DevOps, okay? So, before
DevOps, what was the thing that used to
happen and why DevOps came into picture,
okay? So, before DevOps, there were two
distinct teams, okay? One is the
developer team and the other one is the
operations team, okay? Now, what is the
responsibility of developer team? So,
developer team writes codes, add
features, will push changes and it will
say that it works on my machine, right?
So, this
I don't mind this statement, but this is
generally what every developer will say.
So, if there is something that is not
working, okay, you always going to say
that it works on my machine. And even I
as a developer have said that n number
of times. I don't even remember how many
times I've said, but this is usually the
case, right? So, he's going to write
code, add features, he's going to push
the changes and he's going to write code
on his machine.
Features will also be added on his
machine and he's going to push the
changes to a remote GitHub repository or
a software for version control,
whichever your team is using. And if
there are any issues, okay, developers
usually have this tendency. So, that is
what I have added over here. Now, what
is operations team, okay? So, before
DevOps, there was a separate operations
team that used to come in and the job of
the operations team would be to run
servers, okay? Handle deployments and
they will even fix outages midnight,
okay? And they will even say that your
code is unstable. So, anything breaks in
production, they are always going to say
that, "Hey, your code is unstable and
developers will generally say that,
"Hey, my code is stable. It's working on
my machine." Now, this brings us to the
problems part, okay? Now, there are a
few problems that come in with this
approach, okay? So, earlier, when DevOps
was not there, we had two operations
team and then this lead to couple few
problems. Now, what are the problems?
So, let's talk about problems. Problems,
as you can see here, the first problem
is slow releases, okay?
Now, slow releases meaning whenever
there is a new feature or anything
added, it used to take a bit of time, a
good amount of time to reach the
production for that features to reach
the production because
ops would require a bit of time for
deploying that new feature and
developers and because of this, okay,
because of this problem over here of
slow releases, developers could not
release features that frequently that
they would want to. Okay? And the This
is one problem. Then you had blame game
that comes into picture. So, you know,
if something fails in production,
DevOps or the operations team is going
to say that, "Hey, your code is
unstable." But the developer team is
going to say that, "Hey, my code is not
unstable. It is working on my machine.
See? See over here?" So, usually this
will be
like a blame game that used to happen in
teams wherein one team is blaming
another and other one is blaming back
the same team. Okay? And hence here
there was no shared context, no
accountability for the production. Okay?
So, this is another problem. Then you
had manual deployments. Okay? So,
operations team will do manual
deployments. They will manually copy the
files to the servers. They will restart
the servers and this entire process will
be manual. So, for example, there could
be some issues. Like if I have to give
an example, let's say a missing {dot}
env file will cause a outage on
production and
this this would be because ops deployed
wrong configs manually.
Okay? So, they were not aware of the
right configs, okay? And {dot} env file
got missed. {dot} env file is an
environment file that holds the
environment required or environment
variables that is required for the
software to run. And because of this,
you know, there there will be like
issues in the production, you know? And
hence it will It's manual deployment is
equal to higher risk. That is what I
have written over here. Right? Now, the
next problem over here is no feedback to
the developers. Now, what does this
mean? So, developers essentially could
not see
the error rates, metrics, latencies, and
all of this. So, they are shipping the
features. Okay, they are just on the
build mode. Okay, they are shipping the
features, but what is actually
happening, what is the performance of
their features, all that sort of
visibility was not there for the
development team. And the last problem
we had is inconsistent environment. So,
inconsistent environment meaning the dev
machine
on which the developer would build the
software would not match staging or
production. Okay? So, for example,
developer is making use of Python 3.10.
Okay, he's using a particular version of
Python, but the prod has 3.8.
Right? So, it's it's not going to match,
right? So, it's working on local machine
of developer and production has some
other version, right? So, developer's
machine is not simulating the
production's machine, right? So, that's
a problem over here and because of this
inconsistent environment, there used to
be problems, okay? Now, because of this
problems, you know, DevOps came into the
picture, okay? Now, what DevOps did is
DevOps said that hey, let me make the
entire flow over here
automated and predictable. Okay, so here
I have a few things added. Okay, I'll
just take them in the frame. So, DevOps
made the entire flow automated,
predictable, and monitored. Okay?
So, DevOps said I'll I'll add some fixes
over here. Okay, and what fixes it added
is it will say that instead of manual
work,
okay? Right now, what used to happen is
I I just mentioned what used to happen
is
operations team will do manual
deployments. They will handle servers
manually. They they create servers
manually. They will restart manually.
Everything was manual. So, DevOps said
that, "Hey, let's bring in automation
and let's not rely on manual effort put
by humans out there." Okay? So, that was
our number one thing. So, just to give
you some context as to how this is done,
uh this is done by writing pipelines
where pipelines is going to do the job
of building, testing, and even deploying
the code. Okay? So, so that's that's one
thing that DevOps of modern shared
ownership. Okay? Now, talking coming
talking about the first point itself,
okay? I want to give you an example. Uh
so, let's say a retail company is there
and it is it wishes to deploy back-end
services, let's say five times in a day.
Okay? There are some quick releases that
are happening. So, it it does not have
to rely on uh manual effort of an
operations engineer. Right? Since it's
automated, it it can deploy 5, 10, 50,
100 times also. Right? That can be done
because it's uh just automation in
place. Shared ownership.
Now, with shared ownership, what
happened is
uh back-end engineer is also involved a
little bit in development. Okay? Sorry,
not development, deployment, I mean.
Okay? So, back-end engineer is involved
in deployment. So, what happens is
shared ownership, the culture of shared
ownership came into place wherein
developers started thinking about
deployability, reliability of the
application, errors, performance, all
these sort of thought processes started
coming to the developers. So, operations
is going to automate the infra so that
developers can ship safely. That that
sort of culture started coming into
place. Okay? Then, there was this
another thing that came in uh wherein
containers came into picture. Okay? So,
you must have heard if you have been
building softwares, you must have built
you must have heard of this term called
containers. Okay? Wherein you can create
application containers and these are
small runtimes that get created on your
machine and it can run anywhere, okay?
And they have everything the application
needs to run on itself, right? So, these
came into picture and because of
containers, since container is carrying,
so how it used to work is I'll I'll just
give you an example over here, okay? So,
how it will work is here you have this
one container.
This is a container. Now, this container
will have the dependency.
Okay, dependency that the application
requires. It is going to have the code
for the application. It is going to have
everything, basically. Everything app
requires to run.
So, this is a container. So, container
will be created like this, which has
everything in itself that application
requires to run. It is It does not have
an operating system because installing
an operating system within container
will make it heavy. It's very light and
it just has those things that is needed
for the application to run. So, it's
like a machine in itself. Right? Now,
this eliminates, right? Okay. So, this
eliminated this
thing wherein developers used to say
that, "Hey, it works on my machine." You
know, because everything is now being
containerized, right? You're creating
containers and you are shipping the code
along with its dependencies, right? So,
this eliminated a lot of issues over
here. Then, IAC ensured that infra is
reproducible and stable. Now, what does
this mean? So, IAC means infrastructure
as code.
What does this mean? It's It's a
practice wherein you can define
infrastructure in the form of code,
right? So, for example, I'll just give
you a quick example. If I need two
virtual servers, two EC2 instances,
I need a one private network of to run
my application.
So, earlier what used to happen is you
will go and manually create that using
the dashboard on your cloud provider,
whether it's AWS, Azure, or Google, GCP.
With infrastructure as code, you can
define all of this in the form of code.
Okay? And you can you have to just run
it. So, it will automatically get
created because that is what you have
defined. Okay? Now, this ensured So, so
infrastructure has come in the form of a
code.
Right? You can define infrastructure in
the form of a code. Now, this ensured
that infra can be reproduced again and
again and it's stable. If there are any
sort of updates or changes you want to
make, you have to make in the code and
you have to apply the changes and the
infrastructure in the cloud will get
updated. So, this was a major thing
which helped developers to reproduce the
infrastructure. For example, I created
an infrastructure today with the help of
code. And tomorrow, if I want to destroy
and restart everything, I can do that
easily. Okay? So, earlier with UI, what
used to happen is developers used to
forget clicking or creating few things.
So, that got eliminated with this.
Right?
Then, monitor monitoring closes the
feedback loop. What happened is with the
culture of DevOps, uh monitoring came
into picture. Like, developers got
involved into monitoring. Earlier, only
uh infra uh guys were involved into
that. So, this gave uh developers a
picture or sort of a feedback as to what
is happening with their application.
Okay? So, so yeah, this is how DevOps
has uh helped uh shape the entire
ecosystem of
uh you know, building and publishing the
apps or any any sort of software that
you build today. Okay? So, just
reiterating on what we discussed, I I
know it's it's a little bit heavy, uh
but I've tried to crunch it as easy as
possible into as easy language as
possible. Okay? So, we started with what
is DevOps. So, what is DevOps? DevOps is
not a tool. It's but it's a culture,
practice, and a workflow. Okay? And it's
a way of building and operating software
where development and operations both
work together.
Okay? Now, what is development and
operations? So, here we spoke about
development and operations, where in
before DevOps, okay, developers were
responsible for writing the code, and
operations were responsible for
deploying the code, managing the
servers, doing deployments, and all of
that. So, developers will write code and
forget it.
Operations will take that code to
production. Now, there will be problems
like slow releases, blame game, manual
deployments, there's no feedback to the
developers, inconsistent environments
because developers' machine is having
something else, and you know, remote
production or staging or dev environment
are having something else. Now,
here comes the culture of DevOps, where
in you know, the entire flow of taking
your code from the developers' machine
to that of production is automated,
predictable, and monitored. And how
uh it's done? So, it's done with these
five points that I discussed over here,
where automation comes into place, there
is shared ownership, and uh because of
this, you know, this works on my machine
thing is eliminated. You have
infrastructure of code come in, and then
there is also monitoring that will close
the feedback loop for the developers.
So, I hope this has been uh useful, and
I hope this has given you some good
insight here.
So, now it's time that we begin talking
about Docker, and I'm not just going to
uh discuss Docker, but actually I'm
going to explain this amazing concept uh
with the help of a scenario so that uh
it gets cemented with you. All right?
So, let's talk about Docker, and the
scenario we are going to take is of two
developers, okay, who are working in
team. One developer's name is Sarah, as
you can see on the screen.
>> [snorts]
>> Uh Sarah or Sarah, whatever you want to
call it. And the other another developer
that I have is of a John. Now, they both
are teammates, they are working on the
same code base. And generally, in
development environment, when people are
working on
the same same code base, usually they
have a shared environment where they
have all the code stored over here,
right? And what happens is generally
these developers commit, pull, push from
this shared environment. Now, the shared
environment can be anything. It can be a
version control system like Git, GitHub,
Bitbucket, okay? Whatever you want to
call it. So, usually what will happen is
these developers will commit, push,
pull, and whatever they're doing on the
local machine, they'll make sure that
it's updated onto the shared
environment. And from the shared
environment, they'll make sure that they
have everything onto their local, okay?
So, this is how thing is going to work.
Now, let's say
while working, okay? Of course, the
application that they're working on is
going to have some sort of dependencies.
Now, when I say dependencies, it's like
if you're building a Python application,
you're going to have some dependencies
with the specific versions. If you're
building a Java-based application, you
will have dependencies with specific
versions, right? So, these dependencies
have versions. And let's say one of
these developers, like for example, John
in this case, he happens to update a
library. So, he updates the version
number of a library. Now, what does
happen? What will happen is he pushes
this particular code to the shared
environment, and Sarah pulls this code
onto her local machine, and suddenly
everything breaks on Sarah's machine.
So, why does it break? Okay? Why does it
break? Because one developer has updated
the library, and it has caused the issue
to the another developer due to the
version conflicts or the compatibility
problems on her system. And this leads
to inconsistency
and issues in in the development
environment, and it also makes the
developers
or it also makes difficult to produce
these issues, you know, because it's
because of the environmental conflicts,
right? So,
the point that I'm bringing over here is
same piece of code is working on one
developer's machine, but it's not
working on the other developer's
machine. Okay? Now, to solve the
problem, what could be the solution to
this problem? Now, of course, the
solution to this problem is Docker. So,
to solve this problem,
Sarah's team decides to use Docker. And
uh what they decided is they will
containerize the application using
Docker, create a Docker image that will
include everything like its application
code, dependencies, uh requirement
environment, required environment, and
everything that the application needs to
run. So, earlier they had a shared
environment wherein they just had the
code, right? Now, what they will have is
they are going to have a container sort
of thing, a container, which is going to
have the application code. It is going
to have the dependencies. And also, it
is going to have the requirement
required environment configuration.
Okay? So, all the dependencies, right?
So, so everything is packaged into a
container and it is stored on the shared
environment. Now, how will it work in
the scenario? So, let's say Sarah has uh
you know, the container with the code.
Now, this is not just a container. It
has everything that the application
needs to run. So, it has uh
dependencies, uh the environment
configs, and everything. Okay? And this
code, this container, in fact, is
basically then uh pushed to the shared
environment. And John also has this
shared environment. Now, the thing over
here is if there are any updates on the
John's side, so he will update it over
here and basically it's updated into the
container. And then everybody has those
same changes. So, if it's working on
John's machine now, there's no way that
it won't work on Sarah's machine.
So, I hope this is making sense as to
how we are able to solve the problem
over here that existed amongst
developers who are working in a team.
And this is very common if you you an
experienced developer, you even might
have encountered this kind of scenarios,
right? So, now it's time that we define
Docker. So, what is Docker? So, Docker
is an open-source platform that allows
you to automate the deployment, scaling,
management of applications using this
technology of containerization. Now,
containerization is a lightweight
virtualization technology
>> [snorts]
>> uh that enables you to package an
application and its dependencies into a
standard unit called a container, like
we just saw in our case. So, everything
that the application needed was uh
was packed up into a container, and then
it was shared amongst the developers.
Now, with Docker, you can create
containers that encapsulate everything.
Now, and everything meaning it can
include your application code, it can
include the runtime environment that the
application need, it can include all the
libraries that your application needs to
function, and it can even have the
system tools. So, all of this can be
packaged into a Docker container, and
these containers are very portable, and
they can be deployed on any system that
supports Docker, okay? And this ensures
consistency, and uh it also any
eliminates this phrase that this works
on my machine, and I don't know why it's
not working on yours, right? So, this is
a very common phrase uh amongst
developers if you will you would hear if
you happen to work in teams, okay? Now,
once we uh discussed Docker, I also
wanted wanted to shed some light on this
amazing concept that exists, which is
the concept of virtual machines. Because
generally, learners have a a confusion
when they're learning Docker that, "Hey,
this seems similar to virtual machines.
How are they different?" Okay? So, I'll
just clear this air out over here. So,
in uh virtual machines. Now, what are
virtual machines? Virtual machine is
like separate computer inside your
computer. So, to define virtual machine,
you can think of a virtual machine as a
separate computer inside your computer.
And you know, you you create a virtual
machine which is a software emulation of
a physical computer system. And it
allows you to run
multiple operating systems and
applications on a single physical
machine as if you have multiple
computers within that machine. Okay? And
each virtual machine will behave like a
separate computer as you can see on my
screen. And virtual machines are created
and managed by virtualization software.
So, there are virtualization software
that exist and they will allow you to
create virtual machines, okay? So, see
imagine you have one powerful computer
and you want to use it to run different
operating systems, different
applications that may not be compatible
with each other. Okay? So, instead of
buying separate physical computers and
using them to host operating system and
running those applications, what you
would do is
you will have one powerful computer and
within that using the virtualization
software, you will create multiple
virtual machines that will run their own
operating system and it will also run
the application that you wish to run.
So, it's like you're creating a computer
within a computer. Okay? So, like I
said, every each virtual machine behaves
like a separate computer. So, it is
going to have its own virtual hardware.
It is going to have its own CPU. It's
going to have its own memory, storage,
network interfaces, everything on its
own. Okay? And you can install and run
different operating system like Windows,
Linux, or Mac OS on each virtual machine
and they operate independently. They
isolate the resources and software from
the host system.
Okay? So, it's not like you're buying
separate physical computers. You just
have one computer and on that you have a
bifurcation and you have different
uh, different virtual machines that you
have created that will make use of
resources of the host hardware. Okay, so
for example, if you have, uh, 18 GB of
RAM, for example, or 16 GB of RAM, let's
say for example. Okay? And you created
two virtual machines, so you can
allocate, uh, 5 5 GB to both the virtual
machines. Something like that. Right?
So, basically, they have their own set,
so one virtual machine is going to have
5 gig of RAM is going to use, and you
can also assign a hard disk, let's say
100 GB of hard disk you can assign to
that virtual machine. So, that virtual
machine is only going to operate within
that limit. Okay? So, and that's enabled
by virtualization software, and there
are different virtualization software,
uh, like VMware, VirtualBox, or Hyper-V.
Okay, you can just search for these
names, and these software will provide
you with the necessary infrastructure to
create, run, and manage all the virtual
machines onto your system. Okay? So, it
is going to allow you to allocate
resources to each virtual machine. Uh,
like I said, uh, you know, which virtual
machine should have how much of
resource, how much of RAM should it use.
All of that will be provided by this
virtualization software, and it it can
even allow with some additional
functionality like taking backup
snapshots of the virtual machines,
uh, and startup shutdown is a standard
functionality that you will have, uh, to
control. Okay?
And the advantage of having virtual
machine, like you must be wondering
that, "Hey, why do I need to create
virtual machine?" So, the advantage they
provide is to provide is to have a
flexible and scalable way to utilize the
hardware resources. All right? Now, uh,
you can you have single machine, like I
said, that's very powerful. Okay, you
want to run three operating systems, and
you can you want to have, uh, three, uh,
three machines, essentially, or three,
uh, computers running. So, instead of
buying separate hardware, okay, you can
basically do that in the same machine
itself, and you can allocate hardware
resources. Okay? And yes, all the
instances of the virtual machines will
be isolated from each other. They are
not going to conflict. And why are they
not going to conflict? Because that is
how virtualization software manages
them. Okay? So, that is how virtual
machines function. Now,
let's talk more about virtual machines
and how they differ from Docker. Okay?
So, here you can see this is how virtual
machines will look like. So, you have
machine over here. Then you have the
host operating system. Okay? So, this is
the machine here. Then you have the host
operating system. You have something
called as hypervisor. Now, hypervisor is
a thing that helps you run and manage
virtual machines. Okay? So, these three
things you will have on your host
system. Okay? Then what you would do is
whenever you create a virtual machine,
so you are going to have guest operating
system. Okay? You're going to have
libraries and binaries that is needed
for the application to run. So, this is
the application that you want to run.
Application A, let's say. And you want
to run it in a virtual machine. So, you
will create a virtual machine with an
operating system,
library and binaries that the
application needs and the application
itself. And this single this entire
package is called a virtual machine.
Okay? Now, one thing I'll tell you, you
have you might have Windows Mac OS on
your host machine. Host machine meaning
your own machine. Okay?
Then on that machine, you are creating a
virtual machine. Right? So, virtual
machine can have any sort of operating
system. Like for example, if your host
OS has Mac OS, you can have Windows
installed on the host or the virtual
machine.
Right? So, this virtual machine will
have Windows installed. And your
application will run on Windows. And
then you can have one more virtual
machine for application B. This this is
a separate virtual machine. This is also
going to have its own copy of guest
operating system, like I said, libraries
and binaries for the application to run,
which is application B, and application
B itself, the source code and running
instance of application B. So, all of
this becomes second virtual machine. So,
you can have Windows over here on the
first virtual machine. Second virtual
machine, you can install, let's say,
Ubuntu Linux. Okay? Then you can have
three third virtual machine wherein you
are running a second instance of the
same application B. So, here you are
running application A, you have
application B, and then on the third
instance of the virtual machine, you are
again running application B. And this
also has its own copy of guest OS, like
I said earlier, libraries and binaries
that need the that are needed by the
application B to function. Now, all
these three guest OS can be same or
different. It's your choice, right?
Because they all are isolated from each
other.
So, for example, application A can have
this first virtual machine can have
Windows operating system.
Application B, or the second virtual
machine, or the virtual machine on which
application B is running, can have Mac
OS or Ubuntu, let's say. And the third
virtual machine can have another,
you know, another version or
another Linux, or let's say, a normal
Linux, basically, or Red Hat Linux or
something like that, okay? So, it
depends on what sort of operating system
See, choosing your operating system is
your choice.
Okay? You When you create a virtual
machine using the virtualization
software, you are going to have an
option to select the operating system.
Right? Which of which is the operating
system you wish to have on this virtual
machine. So, all of that you can set up,
and you can create virtual machines like
this. Now, these are all running in
isolation, okay? These are all running
in isolation. Now, there is another uh
operating There's another way, which is
using Docker. Now, over here, what you
saw is these are three machines running
on your machine.
Right? These are three This is like a
three computers running on your machine.
And your machine also has a host OS,
right? So, there are one, two, three,
four four operating systems running
right now on your system.
Right? Now, if you talk about Docker,
Docker has your machine, it has your
host operating system, then it has
something called as Docker engine, which
is used to manage uh and communicate
with Docker uh images and Docker
container. Right? Now, Docker
by concept uses something called as
containers, which are lightweight
isolated compartments that contain only
necessary thing to run your application.
Okay? Let me explain this better because
this is important. So, here in virtual
machines, you saw
you have entire copy of guest OS. So,
this virtual machine has entire copy of
guest OS. This has another copy of guest
OS, another copy of guest OS. Okay, so
let's say you installed Windows in uh
this first virtual machine. Now, your
application does not need the entire
copy of Windows to run.
All right? Let's say your application
just needs three things.
Okay? Three components, okay? Not the
entire copy of Windows. But with virtual
machines or with virtualization, you
still have to install uh the entire copy
of Windows because that is how it works.
All right? But when it comes to Docker,
you don't install operating system, but
instead you just have what is only
needed by the application to run. Okay?
So, it's like a container being created,
okay? It's like a separate machine
wherein the application is running, but
it's not having the entire operating
system. It just has things that your
application needs to function. Okay? So,
for example, if I wish to run uh app A
in isolated manner in a container, what
I'm going to do is I'm going to create a
Docker container, and I'm just going to
have it just going to have the necessary
libraries and binaries that the
application needs to run.
Only those things. Okay? And with this,
it becomes very lightweight compared to
the virtual machines. Because virtual
machines, you are running three
operating systems here, okay? But if you
create three similar Docker container,
it's going to be lighter than running
three virtual machines. I hope this is
making sense, and I I hope I'm able to
make a point as to why it's lighter.
Because here, you are running the entire
operating system, all right? You might
run Windows over here, you might run
Ubuntu over here, you might run Red Hat
over here, or something, some other
operating system over here. All right?
So, the entire operating system is
running on your machine, on your and
your machine also has an operating
system, right? You have installed Mac OS
or Windows on your machine. All right?
So, it's using your system resources.
So, it's heavy, okay? Does your
application need all the components of
the operating system? It might not, all
right? It might not need. It might be a
simple application. So, that that is
where Docker comes in, and Docker says
like, I'm going to create containers
that only need things that
that are needed by the application.
Okay? And this makes you know, Docker
pretty much lightweight. The Docker
containers become pretty much
lightweight and easy to run and manage.
So, here you have application A,
which has libraries and binaries,
application B, which has libraries and
binaries that it needs, and you have
another instance of application B, which
has libraries and binaries that it needs
to function. Okay? I hope this is making
complete sense. This is very important
from understanding the difference, from
the perspective of understanding the
difference between virtual
virtualization and containerization,
okay?
And this is where a lot of people get
confused, and I've tried to explain this
in the simplest possible manner, okay? I
hope this makes sense. Now, let's talk
about a few differences between virtual
machines and Docker containers, okay?
So, if you talk about the differences
over here,
the size of virtual machines are
relatively large and resource intensive,
all right? And Docker containers on the
other hand are lightweight. Okay? So, so
this is this is one major distinction
because virtual machines run their
entire copy of operating system and a
lot of components that you are running
on might not be necessary. But with
Docker containers, you only have things
that are needed and hence it becomes
lightweight and resource efficient for
you. You know, so you can run a lot of
containers together even on a system
with lesser capacity. Right? Startup
time. Now, when it comes to startup
time, of course, virtual machines will
be heavy because they are running full
operating system. So, they'll need more
time to start. But when it comes to
Docker containers, they will be instant
because startup time
because startup time will be lesser
because operating system boot is not
required. Okay?
Resource utilization.
Now, when it comes to resource
utilization, okay, connecting all the
dots that we have discussed so far,
virtual machines is of course going to
like use up a much more resources, but
with Docker containers, you will have
fewer system resources that are being
used because it's lightweight.
Isolation. Okay? So, strong isolation is
provided between virtual machines. Okay?
When it comes to virtual machines, but
in Docker containers, containers are
isolated, but it shares the host
operating system kernel.
So, if you're running Docker containers
on your system, okay, it is going to
make use of your uh operating system
kernel, whichever is running on your
machine. Okay? Because it does not have
its own OS, right? So, that's completely
okay. It does not uh
come across as a disad- disadvantage.
Portability. Now, virtual machines are
portable, okay, but they need OS
compatibility. But when it comes to
Docker containers, they are highly
portable and independent of the host
operating system. So, this is one major
thing that comes across.
Now, talking about scalability. So,
virtual machine scaling require
provisioning of new virtual machines.
Okay, so you have three virtual machines
already running. You want to scale, you
will need to provision five virtual
machines for example, more five more.
Okay, if you want to scale to five more
instances. Okay.
>> [snorts]
>> But with Docker container it is easier
to scale by creating more containers.
You don't have to provision the entire
operating system and all because they
are lightweight. Right? Ecosystem. Now
virtual machine specific tools and
if if you talk about
the ecosystem over here, virtual
machines will work with the virtual
machine specific tools and management
framework.
And Docker will work with the Docker
ecosystem and the tooling that they
have. Right? Development workflow. So
virtual machines of course will be
slower to set up and provisioning
process will be slower. Docker
containers are faster and dependency
management is also better.
Deployment efficiency.
For deploying virtual machines you will
need more overhead due to larger VM
size. But Docker container, it's
efficient with smaller container size.
Okay? So I hope this had made complete
sense as to
what are Docker containers, what is
Docker, the problem it solves, how it
works, how it differs from virtual
machines. I hope this has come across
really really well. Okay? And lastly I
would want to sum up like why should you
use virtual machines or sorry, why
should you use Docker over virtual
machines. Why should you do that?
Because Docker is efficient. Okay,
Docker containers are lightweight, they
use few resources. There is portability
with Docker. Okay, Docker containers are
highly portable. You can put them across
machines as long as the other machine
supports the Docker ecosystem. Okay?
Speed. Docker containers start much more
faster, they stop much more faster. And
isolation. They provide great isolation
as well. Okay? Like VM. Okay? So they
don't interfere with each other Docker
containers. So I hope this sums up and I
hope you have understood the importance
of Docker and how they add value to a
developer's life and their workflow.
So, now it's time that we begin talking
about some of the terminologies and
concepts that we often refer to in the
world of Docker and containerization.
And it's important that you understand
these terminologies well
before moving forward. Okay, so first
thing that we would want to discuss is
Docker images. Now, what are Docker
images? So, Docker images you can think
of them like templates that define what
your container should have and its
dependencies. It's like a blueprint that
exists over there and containers are
basically the runtime environments that
are created from Docker image. So, you
can think of container as a running
instance of
your application that is derived from
the image. Okay, so basically you have
image that exists there which which
defines how the container would run and
what all dependencies it would have.
That is what the image is and then from
images containers are created and the
the container is nothing but a running
instance of an image. Okay, we'll
understand this further. Don't worry if
it's not clear yet. Don't worry, we'll
understand this further. And then you
have something called as Dockerfile.
Now, what is Dockerfile? So, Dockerfile
is like a instructions file. It's a file
that contains the instructions to build
Docker image, right? See, we are talking
about images and that image should have
all the dependencies and necessary
things that is required for a container
to run, right? That is what a image
should have.
But who provides that definition, right?
It has to be defined somewhere. So, that
definition is provided by this file
called Dockerfile.
Right? So, Dockerfile defines the
instructions that are needed to build a
Docker image. Okay, once the image is
built, images are nothing but like a
template that helps
uh spin spin off container. And then
containers are nothing but runtime
environments that are created from
images. So, you can call container as
the running instance of the image. Okay?
Now, to summarize this in the form of a
diagram, this can help you understand
better. So, here on the left-hand side
you can see Dockerfile. It has the image
definition. Then you have the Docker
image. Right? So, basically image
definition will have the definition of
the image as to what all the uh image
should have, what all dependency the
application should have, how to run the
application, you know? Because you might
be running different kind of
application, you might be running
Python, JavaScript, you know, you might
be running Spring Boot. Every
application has different needs, and
there are different ways in which the
application run. For example, uh running
a Node.js application, Spring Boot
application, and Python application,
they all might vary.
Right? You You cannot run the Spring
Boot application the same way you might
run a Python application. So, that would
vary. So, all of these instructions will
go into the image definition, which is
Dockerfile. Then using this Dockerfile,
a Docker image is created.
Right? And Docker image, like I said,
it's it's like a blueprint for your
application or the container, and it's a
lightweight read-only thing that uh that
that your container will use to run.
Right? And then what is a container? So,
container is just a running instance of
the image that exist, right? And uh and
and basically uh it it will have your
application running as well. Now,
from a Docker image, it's possible to
have multiple containers running. So, if
you have a Docker image created, it's
not like you can just run one one
container from that Docker image. You
can run multiple instances of your
application in separate containers. So,
you can have multiple containers up and
running. Now, another terminology that
you will hear is image layer. So, what
is an image layer? So, every image is
made up of multiple layers that is
stacked on top of each other. So, you
can see this in this diagram over here.
You have this Docker image and this
Docker image consists of multiple
layers. Now, why is
why are
why are layers used when it comes to
Docker images? So, the reason is
rebuilds are faster, okay? And a layer
can be cached, okay? That is one one
reason. It improves the performance and
if there are multiple Docker images that
are making use of a same similar layers,
then that reduces the storage space
because it is going to reuse a
particular layer across multiple images,
okay? So, basically, that is the reason
basically from efficiency point, the
performance standpoint, and even storage
standpoint, images have layers. I hope
this is making sense. And then, you will
hear the concept of Docker registry as
well. Now, what is Docker registry? A
Docker registry is just a storage
service for Docker images. So, it's it's
just a place where
images are stored remotely, okay?
So, understand this, okay? You have your
source code residing on your local
machine, okay? If you're using version
control system, you would want to push
it to a remote cloud like GitHub or
Bitbucket, all right? And you you may be
using a particular version control
software and you do this so that you
have your source code available on a
remote cloud that can be accessed by
other people, your team, and it also
serves as a backup for you just in case
your local machine or local system
fails, right? Similar way for Docker,
you have your Docker image on your local
machine over here, right? Now, you might
want to share this or make this image
available across the globe, across the
internet, amongst your teams. So, how
are you going to do that? Or or you
might want to even move it or delete it
from your local machine and have it
stored in the remote cloud
just in case your system, you know,
fails. So, in that case you'll make use
of a Docker registry, which is a remote
cloud which exists in remote cloud where
you can push your Docker image. So, this
this thing of moving your image from
local machine to a Docker registry is
called push. So, you push your Docker
image
and your Docker image will reside in a
Docker registry. Okay? And Docker
registry
can be accessed by anyone in the world
and you know, they can access your
Docker image and use it. And of course,
there are concepts like public and
private repositories. You can you can
have public images private images. Okay?
If you don't want the image to be
publicly available, you can of course do
that over there. Okay? But that exists.
Then there is a concept of for Docker
tag. Now, what is Docker tag? So,
whenever you create a image, okay?
You have it you can assign it a tag and
tag is simply a label or a name that is
assigned to the image version. Okay? So,
for example, you are working on an
application
and [snorts] let us say that application
is
is your development version. So, you can
have app name colon dev over there. So,
that that tells that this is a
development version. So, similarly you
can see some uh tags over here. So, this
is my app is the image name and prod
means it's a production version. My app
is the image name, version two means
it's version two, v2.
My app is the image name and latest
meaning this is the latest image
available. Okay? So, these are some
examples of the tags that can exist for
an image, right? So, so this is about
tag.
So, there is one more concept that I
would want to touch upon, which is
Docker Engine. And Docker Engine is a
runtime that is doing the job of
managing the container. So, this is one
of the concepts that you will often hear
when it comes to Docker and
containerization. I hope this has been
useful, and I hope whatever we discussed
is clear.
So, now it's time that we begin talking
about Docker Registries. And it's an
important concept. I will will will talk
about what Docker Registries are and
what different registries that exist.
So, Docker Registry, first of all, it
does the job of storing your container
images. Okay. Now, one question or one
thing you might ask me is "Hey, I can
store it on my local machine, too,
right? I created a Docker image. I can
store it on my local machine. Why do I
need something called as Docker
Registry?" Okay, so let me explain this
to you with the help of the analogy of
your code.
You wrote some code. Okay.
You have version control system like Git
on your local machine. You're tracking
the versions of your software, right?
Now,
despite you having your code on your
local machine using version control
system locally, you might want to push
it onto a remote service like GitHub or
Bitbucket. Right? Why do you do that?
Because having source code just on your
local machine is risky. Tomorrow, if
something happens to your local machine,
you're not able to access it, you lose
your source code. And also, having your
source code hosted on a remote platform
enables you to do team collaboration.
So, that tomorrow, if your team grows,
you have different people working, and
they all can access the source code, and
it's it's basically a team-driven
building that you are doing. Right? Same
goes with images. You have images
created on your local machine. Okay. You
want to store it remotely on a cloud so
that anyone can pull the image, use it.
So, in that case, you will make use of
something called as Docker Registry.
Right? So, this is where Docker registry
comes into play.
Now, you can think of Docker registry,
like I said, just like a storehouse for
your Docker images. And just like you
push and pull or push or and pull your
source code, you can push and pull your
images as well to and from the registry.
All right? Now, let us come over to the
browser and let us take a look at some
of the Docker registries that exist. All
right? Uh so, sorry for the light mode
over here. I could not figure out uh the
dark mode on this website, but just bear
with me. This is docker.com. Uh we'll
talk about different services that offer
Docker registries and the differences
between them as well, which one to
choose when you're beginning and all of
that stuff. Okay? So, just hang in
there. This is docker.com, the official
website of Docker. Now, if you come over
here, if you go to product, you'll see
uh something called as Docker Hub over
here. So, Docker Desktop is a software
which enables you to use Docker on your
local machine,
but if you want to store your Docker
images remotely, you can make use of the
official uh registry over here, which is
Docker Hub. Now, if I click on this,
okay?
If I click on this, you'll see this
Docker Hub up here.
And uh here, you can see this is the
entire Docker Hub. Now, you can see uh
some stats over here. So, Docker Hub
basically, before we move any further,
I'll mention like Docker Hub is the
default registry for Docker. So, if
you're pushing and pulling images and if
you don't mention the registry, by
default, it's considered as Docker Hub,
okay? And there are so many images over
here and uh these are like monthly
unique IP addresses that access the
site, okay? So, uh there are a lot of
official images as well, okay, which
we'll talk about, but you can just go
through this website. Now, this website
keeps on changing. They might alter the
design and all. So, depending on when
you're watching this video, you might
see something else over here. All right?
But that's absolutely okay. Don't worry
about it. So, Docker Hub, and this is
what the interface looks like, and here
you have an option to choose a plan. You
can get started over here. Choose a plan
meaning
yes, they have paid plans as well with
additional features, but if you're
starting out, generally free version is
enough for learning. Okay? So, you don't
need a paid version unless and until you
need some specific features.
I have been using free version itself
for so long,
and free version just suffices. Okay?
So, if you're building projects, doing a
lot of things, you just stick to the
free version and just sign up over here.
So, if you click on get started,
you will be taken to this particular
page where in you can sign up over here.
Okay? So, this is Docker Hub. Now, I'll
tell you something. Docker the pro of
using Docker Hub is basic basically it's
easiest to use, millions of official
images you will find over here. It's
great for beginners, and all the public
images are free over here. Okay? So, so
that is something that you can and
generally when developers start their
journey, we are when they start learning
about Docker and all, the first thing
they use over here is Docker and Docker
Hub.
Okay? So, they start actually with
Docker Hub and not with the other
registries that exist. Okay? So, this is
your starting point over here. And yes,
talking about the official images over
here. So, you won't see any images over
here without signing up. It's asking you
to create an account, but I would
recommend you come over here to
hub.docker.com.
Okay? Docker Hub. So, this is
hub.docker.com, which is the official
Docker registry. Come over here, and
here is where you can browse all the
images.
Okay? So, this product actually you saw
over here, Docker Hub, this product.
This is hosted on this domain,
hub.docker.com. So, just come over here.
It has a fantastic dark mode, as you can
see. You know, it's built for
developers, right? So, here you can
toggle the dark mode, light mode. Okay?
I love dark mode. So, you can see dark
mode, and here you can browse all the
images. So, for example, here you can
see generative AI based images, like AI
models over here, MCP servers.
Okay? You have a different categories
over here, and you can see a lot of
official images. Now, what do official
images mean? Official images meaning
images that have been put out by someone
who is officially behind it. For
example, this is the official image of
TensorFlow, and it's being put out by
TensorFlow itself.
Official image of
PyTorch. LangChain, official image of
Python.
You can see over here. So, you can
actually pull this image and you can run
Python source code without installing
Python onto your system, you know? It's
It's that powerful. So, so you can see a
lot of images over here, MySQL,
Postgres. You can just browse through,
and you can click over this, and this
These are all official images, right?
So, you can just play around with this.
If you click, you will see the detailed
page over here.
Okay, with some commands as to how you
can get the image onto your local
machine and all. Just the overview of
the image, the image size, last updated,
everything around this image. Okay, you
can see tags and all as well over here.
Okay, so this is Docker Hub.
hub.docker.com is where you can access
it, and if you want some additional
details, you can go to the official
website and check the additional
details. Now, over here, you can create
a free account. Okay? You don't need a
paid account, like I said. If you're
starting out, free account is
recommended. You don't need paid for
anything as of today.
All right? So, so that's something about
Docker registry, and yes, it's best for
learning, putting out open source
material out there. This is the best
site over here. If you're putting out If
you're building some open source
software and you want to expose the
images or publish the images publicly,
this is the best site. Okay? There are
lots of open source projects hosted over
here, by the way. Okay? So, this is
Docker Hub, which is officially from
Docker itself. This is the official
registry, and the default one, too.
So, now just come to Amazon over here,
which is aws.amazon.com.
Click on products.
And just go over here and see browse all
products. So there are tons of products
that AWS has and here
you should search for ECR. Okay.
So if you search for ECR it stands for
Amazon elastic container registry ECR
Amazon ECR. Okay. So this is the
registry. So if you click on this this
is the registry by Amazon that allows
you to easily store share and deploy
your container software anywhere. Okay
and like the name says it is basically
AWS behind it over here. Okay and this
is also being used by a lot of
organizations to be specific. So if your
organization is making use of AWS for a
lot of things like for example it's
using EC2 instances they have Kubernetes
on AWS. So they will prefer Amazon ECR
to store and manage images. Okay and yes
it's a product coming in from Amazon so
it's best.
It's it's basically best for working
inside the Amazon ecosystem. Okay.
So so this is one option you have and
then you also have product from Google
Cloud and if you come over here to
cloud.google.com
go to products and click on containers
and here you will see this artifact
registry. So the registry by
Google is called as artifact registry.
You can click over here and you can just
go through the artifact registry. Okay.
So you can basically publish your images
over here on Google's artifact registry.
Okay.
With Azure
if you come so Azure also has their own
container registry. If you go to
products over here and let me look for
here. You can see under container you
have
you should have container Azure
container registry. This is the one. So
click on this
Azure container registry and it's
basically you can see a registry of
Docker and open source open container
initiative, okay? So, you can basically
have your
containers hosted over here. So, if your
company is preferring Google, you can
make use of Google container registry,
Google artifact registry, basically. And
if you're making use of Azure for
hosting your applications and all, then
companies generally prefer making use of
Azure container registry and staying in
the Azure ecosystem, you know, because
integrations and all is easier over
here. But, if you're not in Amazon
ecosystem, not in Google ecosystem, not
in Azure ecosystem, then companies or
people, individual developers, prefer
Docker Hub because that's the easiest
and the default one available there.
Okay? Now, also I would want to
talk about this concept of public and
private repositories or public and
private registries, not repositories,
okay?
Repositories isn't source code, okay?
So, what is public registry? Like the
name says, like it's the registry is
public. Anyone can access
pull image. Anyone can see what all
images are there. Anyone can check the
image, okay, and use it. And private
registries is only restricted It's
restricted to you or to your team. So,
if you're doing a development in team,
and if you want that registry to be
accessible to your team so that anyone
in the team can pull push images, so
that's something you can do. So, if
you're basically building a software in
a company, you have a team, so you'll
make use of private registry because you
don't want your
development work and everything to be
exposed to the outer world. You will
make sure that the access is restricted
to the team itself, okay? But, if you're
building something open source, you want
it to be public, you know, so you can
make use of public registries. So,
that's the difference between public and
private registries. I hope this is makes
this is made sense and you got a good
overview, hands-on overview of different
registries that exist in the world.
So, now it's time that we begin talking
about the architecture of Docker. So,
let's discuss Docker architecture and
I'll try to make it as simple as
possible so that even beginners amongst
you can follow it easily and understand
what are the different components and
how are they working together for you to
deliver amazing experience. Okay? So,
first thing we start talking about the
host operating system that you can see
over here. Now, what is host operating
system? Host operating system is the
operating system where Docker is
running. So, if you're running Docker on
your machine,
your system becomes the host operating
system or the host machine. And this is
where the CPU, like CPU which is the
compute power, is allocated to Docker,
the memory is allocated to Docker,
networking resources are allocated to
Docker, and also a little bit of file
system is allocated to Docker to store
and manage images and containers, okay?
So,
host OS is simply the machine or the
system where Docker is running. Then
next comes a few components, okay? Don't
get overwhelmed by these components.
I'll explain everything bit by bit,
okay? So, Docker daemon. What is Docker
daemon? Docker daemon is a component,
Docker API is also a component, and
Docker CLI is also a component. So, what
is Docker daemon? Docker daemon is like
a heart of Docker. Okay? It's actually
the heart of Docker and this is who who
does all the work of managing images,
containers, starting the containers,
stopping the containers, building the
images, pulling and pushing from the
registry is all done by Docker daemon.
Okay? Who does it? So, who which What is
the heart of Docker? It's Docker daemon
who does the job of managing,
maintaining containers, images, pushing,
pulling from the registry. All the work
is done by Docker daemon. Now, what is
Docker API in that case? So, Docker API
allows you to interact or or receive
requests to Docker daemon. Okay? So,
Docker daemon is exposed via Docker API
internally. Can you access API
externally? No, it's internally. Okay?
And then you have Docker CLI,
which is a client that allows you to
interact with Docker. Okay, so CLI
meaning command line interface. So, if
you're running commands related to
Docker. So, if you're using if you use
Docker down the line, you will be
running Docker related commands. Those
commands are basically
given to CLI or those are intercepted by
CLI and then it goes to API Docker API
and then it is uh communicated to Docker
daemon and then the action performs or
action happens uh based on whatever
command you have run. Okay, and all
these components are together called as
Docker engine.
What are they called? They are called as
Docker engine.
And uh so, Docker engine is one term
that you will hear very very often
during installation, during using
Docker. You'll hear this term very
often, Docker engine. So, Docker engine
has three main components. One is Docker
daemon,
which is the heart of Docker. It
actually does all the job of managing,
maintaining Docker images and Docker
containers, as you can see over here.
Then you have Docker API, which allows
you to interact with Docker daemon. It
acts as a messenger between Docker CLI
and Docker daemon. Okay, it's it's a way
in which you can communicate with Docker
daemon. And then you have Docker CLI,
which is nothing but the command line
interface, Docker command line
interface, which
allows you to interact to with Docker
using commands. And generally you will
be running Docker commands on your
terminal and those commands are
intercepted by CLI, then given to API
and then Docker daemon does the job. And
this entire Docker engine is running
where? On your host operating system.
Okay? And your host operating system,
like I said, is doing the job of
allocating resources, CPU, memory,
networking resources, and even file
system for storing everything. So, this
is how Docker functions. And then,
remotely, you will have Docker registry,
where you will host images, and you will
pull the images locally onto your
system, and Docker daemon will actually
do the job of pulling the images from
the registry, and it will store the
images locally, and then if you want to
run containers out of it, or if you want
to run images, it is going to run Docker
containers for you. Okay? So, this is
the entire architecture simplified for
you. Okay? And now, when we talk about
Docker, you generally have your machine,
host OS, and you have Docker engine.
Right? So, you have your machine, which
is your machine hardware. You have host
OS, and then Docker engine. So, this is
applicable if you're running Docker on
your system. Okay? If you're running
Docker remotely
on any cloud provider, then you will
have a virtual machine over there, like
a machine, host OS, and Docker engine.
And over there,
within Docker, like Docker engine, over
the top will have libraries and
binaries, and your application basically
packed into a container, and you can
have multiple containers running over
there. Okay? So, this is the entire
architecture of Docker.
I hope this has been useful, and I hope
you all have been able to follow it with
ease.
So, now it's time that we begin talking
about installing and setting up Docker
onto your system.
We are going to set this up onto our
system, because we want to have the
ability of running and managing
containers onto our system as well,
right? And for that, we will have to
come to docker.com, and here you will
see this option of downloading Docker
Desktop. So, you can download directly
from here, but I'm not You can do it
from your I'm not going to show you this
way, because this is of course
straightforward, but I'll take you to
the documentation, where you will find
additional information and step-by-step
guides on how you can proceed with the
installation, okay? So, I'm going to
touch on Docker Docs, okay? So, here you
can click on developers and click on
documentation. Open this over here. Yes,
of course, you have download links
everywhere, so it's not just on the
website where you can see the download
links, but you have download links
everywhere, okay? You can see.
>> [snorts]
>> So, come over here. Click on get
started. And then over here, under
introduction, you will have this option
of Docker Desktop, okay? Now, one thing
I'll mention over here, Docker Desktop
is the easiest way to get started with
Docker onto your machine. So, if you're
learning Docker, there is a software or
an application called Docker Desktop
that you have to install,
and you have to make sure that it's
running whenever you are working with
Docker, okay? So, Docker Desktop, you
have to come over here, okay? You click
on get Docker Desktop, scroll down. And
now over here, you can see you have
Docker Desktop for Mac, Docker Desktop
for Windows, and Docker Desktop for
Linux. So, let us discuss steps for each
one. But, I'll tell you something, the
steps does not vary a lot. Only there
are a few things that I want to discuss
for each operating system, and I'll make
sure you're up to speed. So, first for
Mac, you have the Apple silicon chip
version. You have the Intel version, and
then you have the install instructions.
Now, if you are making use of Apple
silicon chips in your Mac machine, you
have to download this, and this goes
without saying, you can download this
for Intel-based Mac machines.
Install instructions. So, install
instructions are very straightforward,
okay? I'll I'll just take you through
the installation steps, but you have to
make sure
that you have the supported version of
macOS and at least 4 GB of RAM, okay?
So, just make sure you have that, and
then you can you will basically, once
you download, you get this Docker DMG
file that you can open, double-click,
and you can drag it to the applications
folder, and the installation is done.
Okay? It's It's very straightforward,
okay? So, just do that, and I'll come
back over here. Okay? So, coming to
Windows, we'll click on install
instructions. Now, if you go to install
instructions, you will see there are
quite a few versions of Windows.
The Windows version. Okay, so you will
see X86_64
and then you have X86_64 ARM. So, if you
have ARM-based
PC, then you need to download this one.
But how do you check if your PC is
ARM-based or X86_64-based? Okay,
so for that, I'll tell you.
So, you have to hit your start button,
the Microsoft start button. Uh search
for settings. Just go to settings over
here like this. And once you come over
here, you can go to system. Okay, so
here you have system. And then you
scroll down over here.
And you will find about over here. Okay,
and if you scroll down further, you will
see the
device information at the bottom
somewhere. Okay, over here. Device
specifications. And here you can see
that I am on X64-based
processor.
Okay? So, if you have X64-based PC, you
have to get the AMD version. Okay?
AMD64.
Otherwise, if you have ARM over here
mentioned, then you have to get the ARM
one. Okay, so this is the X64
one. So, this is the one for me. So, I'm
going to download this. Just download
this. If you see ARM over there, you
have to click on ARM. Okay, so just do
that. And if you're on Linux,
so I'll go back. And here on Linux, if
you go to install instructions, okay?
Depending on the platform, there are
different install instructions like
Ubuntu, Debian, Fedora, and Arch. So,
basically, if you're on
Debian or if you're on Ubuntu, okay?
Click over here and you need to
basically install this and then you need
to run this command. Okay? That's it.
The installation will be done. So, this
is for Linux, but
let us now install the software over
here.
Now, since I'm on a Windows machine,
okay, I double-clicked on the dot exe
file that got downloaded onto my system.
Okay, so I had downloaded the installer,
which is x64
beast installer, which is the one for my
machine. I installed that Sorry, I
downloaded that and I double-clicked on
the exe file. Now, I saw see something
like this, installing Docker. So, these
are the default options. Use WL2 instead
of Hyper-V recommended. So, I'll I've
checked that. Add a desktop shortcut.
This is optional. I don't want to add a
desktop shortcut. If you want, you can
add. And I'll just say okay over here,
and you can see it's processing
everything and it's finishing the
installation. So, we'll wait until this
finishes, and you can see a progress bar
at the bottom.
Okay, so we'll wait for a while until
this progress bar finishes.
So, now over here, I see the progress
bar was complete. It took a while, a few
minutes, and the installation has been
succeeded. Okay. Now, I'll say close,
and I'll open Docker Desktop from my
applications list.
Now, if you are from uh if you if you
are on Mac, okay, it will be just drag
and drop for you uh in the applications
folder. If you are on Linux, okay, uh
you have to run the command line like I
showed you over here, install
instructions. You have to just run the
command basically based on the operating
system or based on the Linux version you
are on. Okay, and then uh basically, you
can launch the Docker Desktop on Linux.
Okay, it's pretty straightforward, not
that difficult. And now, I have launched
Docker Desktop for the first time, and
you can see this pop-up over here. Okay,
this is a pop-up that is asking me to
accept the subscription service
agreement. I'll just say accept. You can
read more if you wish to or if you're
curious. So, these are the same steps uh
Now, after installing Docker, the first
experience
is same for all Windows,
uh Linux, and Mac. Okay, so just say
accept. And then you will see something
like this. Okay? So, it's asking me to
create an account on Docker. Okay. Now,
you can create an account on Docker. I
highly recommend that. You can enter
your
You can enter your So, click on personal
and you can enter your email address. If
you have a work
email address, you can click select work
and enter that. Okay? But if you have
personal, you can use personal. And uh,
you can create an account. I highly
recommend that. But if you happen to
skip it, if you don't want to do it
right now, you can also do it later.
Okay? So, you will have an option over
here to sign in, which will ask you to
create an account. All right?
Now, here this is the first interaction
uh, with Docker. Okay? So, what I will
do is I will quickly create an account
by hitting sign in and I'll make sure
uh, that I have a registered account in
my Docker Desktop app. This is
important. I'll tell you why. Because if
you want to push uh, images from your
local machine to a remote uh, registry
like Docker Hub, then in that case you
would need an account because it's going
to register everything the images
against your username. Right? So, you
need an account. So, just say sign in
and create an account. It's free
anyways. It does not cost you anything.
Now, once you're done with the
installation, you have to make sure that
Docker Desktop is running over here.
It's open. Okay? And just open any sort
of inbuilt terminal on your operating
system. Whether you are on Windows, Mac,
or Linux. Just open any sort of
terminal. So, here I'm on Windows. So,
I've opened PowerShell. Now, we are
going to run a few commands and verify
our installation. Okay? So, first
command I'm going to run is Docker
hyphen two times and version. Okay? So,
the moment I press enter, all right. Uh,
okay. I made a spelling mistake. It's
version. Okay? So, that is why it did
not work. But I'll
You can see the version number is being
printed. Okay? And you can see the build
number also being printed. I'll just
clear everything out and I'll just run
this again on a fresh screen. Okay? So,
you can see Docker version and this is
the version of the Docker installed onto
my system. This should ideally work on
your system and this verifies that
Docker is working properly. Also, you
need to if you if you need to check the
Docker engine info, so you can say
Docker and you can say info over here
and it will just give you the
information around Docker engine and
everything. Okay? So, you can see there
is a lot of information that has been
pushed out. Okay? So, it's it's long.
Okay? But you can you can check it just
for the sake of it. You can see client
version and everything over here. Okay?
So, this is about
Docker information. You You also need to
check Docker compose and then version.
So, Docker compose is just another tool
uh,
which you can use to manage multiple
containers and run Docker compose files.
Okay? Don't worry if you don't know
these keywords, but just run Docker
compose version and you should see
Docker compose version being printed
over there. Okay? So, so yeah, these
commands verify the installation and
with just one tool, Docker Desktop, you
have all three working on your local
machine, whether it's Windows, Mac, or
Linux and that verifies that we have
Docker up and running properly onto our
system. Now, one thing I would like to
highlight over here, whenever you are
running Docker based commands or working
with images or containers, you have to
make sure that Docker Desktop is
up and running. Okay? So, you have to
make sure that Docker Desktop is up and
running. If it's shut down, then these
commands won't work.
I hope this helps.
All right. So, now is the time that we
get some experience with Docker and we
create and run our first container and
we also get some image uh locally onto
our system. All right, so what I'm going
to do is I'm going to explore some
pre-built images that have been hosted
already on Docker Hub. And for that, I'm
going to come to this website, which is
hub.docker.com, that you see over here.
And here, I am going to search for hello
{hyphen} world, okay? Now, like any
programming language, uh you start with
hello world, right? Hello world comes
first. And whenever you're learning
something, you make a program that
displays hello world. So, same is the
case that we are going to follow with
Docker. And here, you can see uh this
image hello_1,
hello_world, sorry. And here, you can
see this badge. If you hold on this, you
will see that this is a Docker uh
official image. So, just click on this.
And uh if you go uh over to this, this
is an official image. You can see the
number of pulls that you have had over
here, which is 1 billion plus. And this
has been starred over 200 uh or 2,500
times, okay?
And here, if you scroll down, you'll see
all the information uh about this
repository, okay? And uh what you need
to do is uh here, uh you can see over
here, this is the command. So, here, you
can see example output. And you can see
docker run hello_world. So, if you run
this command, you will see this as the
output, this complete output over here.
Right? And uh what I'm going to do is
I'm going to copy this command, docker
run hello_world. I'm going to head over
to our terminal over here. And on the
terminal, you um make sure before
heading over to the terminal, you make
sure that Docker Desktop is up and
running. Because without Docker Desktop,
you won't be able to run any kind of
Docker command. So, just make sure
Docker Desktop is up and running. Then,
I'm on Windows, so I have opened native
terminal, which is uh this is Windows
native terminal, which is PowerShell. If
you're on Mac Linux, just open any uh
terminal that you have installed uh by
OS on your system. So, just open that
and uh make sure Docker is running like
I said, okay? Now, before running this
command I've pasted this command, but
before running this command if you come
over here to containers, you won't see
any containers. So, you can see on this
Docker Desktop application, you have an
option to see containers, images, you
can see volumes and Kubernetes and
everything, right? So, I'm not seeing
any sort of containers, neither I'm
seeing any sort of images. So, I'm going
to say Docker run hello world. And the
moment I say enter, you'll see it says
unable this image locally. So, it is
pulling this image from the library.
Pull has been complete, okay? And it
downloaded the new image. So, this part
over here that you could see
is is done to basically pull the image
onto your local machine, okay? So, so
see this. You're trying to run an image.
Okay? You're trying to run an image and
what happens is Docker starts looking
for this image locally onto your system.
If it's not able to find then what it's
going to do is it is going to look on
Docker Hub for this image. Now, why
Docker Hub? Because that's the default
registry that is configured with Docker,
right? So, it's trying to look for hello
world latest. Now, latest is the latest
tag. By default, it's looking for the
latest tag if you have not specified any
tag over here. And you can see it's
pulling this tag. It's pulling this
image. The pull was complete. Pull
meaning it is downloading
that image onto your system. You see
this
hash number over here? Then the status
is downloaded new image for hello world
latest. And then this is the output of
from the image. You can see over here.
Right? So, you can see hello from
Docker. This message shows that your
installation appears to be working
correctly, right? So, Docker image is
working correctly and hello world
message was also printed. And you can
see over here. To generate this message,
Docker took the following steps. The
Docker client contacted the Docker
daemon. Right? So, we have Docker client
installed. We have Docker client that
contacted Docker daemon. Now, Docker
daemon is a part of Docker Desktop,
right? And Docker daemon did the job of
pulling the Hello World image from
Docker Hub. Okay? And this is AMD64 and
the Docker daemon created a new
container. So, once the image was
pulled, from that image a new container
was created which runs the executable
that produces the output that you're
currently reading.
Okay? So, Docker daemon created a new
container from the image. Who got the
image locally onto a system? Docker
daemon. Who created a new container from
the image? Docker daemon. And then
Docker daemon streamed that output to
the Docker client which sent it to your
terminal. I hope this is making sense.
Right?
So, to try more something more
ambitious, you can run
run an Ubuntu container with this
command. Right? So, you can run an
Ubuntu container with this command. It's
also suggesting you. And you can share
the images automate workflows and all on
this on this website which is the Docker
registry hub.docker.com. Okay? So, I
hope this is making sense. This is a
fantastic image to get started with
Docker and see what's happening. Right?
And it also gives you an explanation.
So, it's for beginners. And if you go to
Docker Desktop over here oops, so I
accidentally clicked on settings. If you
go to Docker Desktop under images,
you're going to see this image which is
Hello World over here. You can see the
tag of this image available on a local
machine is latest. This is the image ID.
So, every image has an image ID. And
beside these, you will see the copy
button. Okay? This image was created 4
months ago. Size is 20.34 KB. And this
is an option for you to run containers
from this image. So, if you click that,
click this a container will be created.
Okay? And here you can see green dot.
Now, green dot means that this image is
currently in use.
In use meaning there is a container that
is created with the help of this image,
okay? And here you have an option to
delete the image. So, if you have any
sort of images that you know you wish to
clean up your system because images
might consume There will be heavy images
that you will work on. And images might
consume a lot of space onto your system,
right? So,
you might want to clear up and you can
do that using this delete button.
And then if you come to containers tab
over here, you can see this container
tab over here and this container is now
stopped. So, if you see over here, it's
exited. The status is exited. Right? And
this is a container ID. This was the
image that this container was using. And
CPU percentage
like there's no CPU percentage because
this container is stopped. And you have
an option to start this container again.
Right? If you click on this, you can see
logs and all of this particular
container.
Right?
Uh so, yeah, this is how things worked.
Now, one thing I would like to mention
over here, you executed this command
docker run hello-world. Right? So, if
you run if if you make use of docker run
command and if you specify an image
name, if that image does not exist
locally, what you saw over here is it
pulled the image from docker registry.
But if the image existed locally, what
will happen is so if if I come over here
and if I run this command again, docker
run hello-world, then you will see it is
not pulling the image again and it is
just directly running a or creating a
container from that image.
Okay? So,
if the image does not exist, there is
one additional step where in where in
the image is downloaded onto your local
machine. But if the image exists, like
in this case over here, uh here,
okay? The image was not downloaded
because the image already existed onto
our system, right? So, I hope this is
making sense and here now you will see
there are two containers created from
one image because you ran the command
docker run two times. So, two containers
were created over here. Okay? So, what
is image? Image, like we know, image is
a blueprint, okay, which provides the
definitions for containers. And what are
containers? Containers is an running
instance of the image. Right? And
basically it it has everything. It has
its own set of dependencies and
everything that is needed for your
application to run and function. Okay?
So, yeah, this is what it is and I hope
this has given you a good overview and
good first experience of Docker.
>> [snorts]
>> So, now is the time that we explore and
try to make use of some images that
expose something via the browser for us
to access. Okay? And this will be
interesting because this will allow us
to
work and play around with some more
concepts around running images. Okay?
So, what I'm going to do is I'm going to
again head over to this website, which
is the Docker registry, and let us
explore the image of Nginx.
Now, engine x. So, you can see this is
the spelling, e Oh, not so Sorry, not e.
It's n g i n x. Nginx, it's called.
Okay? So, you can see this Nginx over
here. If you're not aware of Nginx, what
Nginx is, so it is an open-source web
server. All right? And it exposes a page
that you can access through the browser.
So, there is a objective of why we are
playing around with this image because
without a lot of effort we will have a
Docker image running on our application
that will expose something that we
should be able to access. Right? So, you
can see over here, this is Nginx. It's
an open-source
reverse proxy server for HTTP, HTTPS,
and all these protocols. Okay?
It does a lot of work over here.
So, so that This is what we are going to
run. So, what I'm going to do is here,
you can see the image name. This is
Nginx. Right? So, I'll come over here.
Right, and I'll make sure that Docker
Desktop is up and running. And here, if
you see, here we just have one image.
So, I'll come over here. I'll say clear
right now. And I'll say Docker run and
I'll say engine x like this. Oops.
Sorry. So, there there's a typo over
here. Docker run engine x. Now,
let me press enter and let us see what
happens.
Okay, so you can see it is unable to
find this image locally, so it's pulling
all the images remotely and you can see
the image pulling is happening in layers
over here. You can see.
And the image was downloaded and you can
see the image is running over here.
Okay, you can see started worker and
there are a lot of logs that are coming
in. Right? So, this is working fine and
here, if you scroll through,
so this is all the logs. Now, let's say
I wish to access the web server. So,
there is a page that is by default
exposed by this web server, which is
port 8080. Now, if I try to expose this
web server post, so if I say localhost
8080, this won't work.
This won't work. Why is this not
working? Okay, because it's running it's
exposing the web page inside the
containers port 8080. Okay, and I'm
trying to access it from my local
machine's port 8080. So, it won't work.
So, in this case, there's a concept of
port mapping that comes into play. Okay,
so I'll shut this container, so you can
see this
this window is basically completely
occupied over here and this is different
from running
hello world containers, right? So, in
order to be able to be execute in order
for me to be able to execute any sort of
commands over here, I should stop this
container by pressing control C. Also,
control C on Windows and control C or
command C on Mac. Okay, so this will
exit the container. This will stop the
container. Now, I'll run a new command.
Okay, I'll add some parameters. So, I'll
say over here docker run and I'll say
hyphen P
and I'll say 8080 {colon} 8080.
Something like this.
Okay? And I'll press enter.
Now, let us try accessing this. Okay, so
let me refresh this and you can see now
you're seeing this welcome page. So,
welcome to Nginx. If you see this page,
the Nginx web server is successfully
installed. Right? Have we installed it
onto our local machine? Not really. So,
where are we running Nginx server? We
are running it as a docker container.
And are we able to access it from our
local machine? Absolutely yes. We are
able to access it from our local
machine. How does that happen? So, this
happens because of port mapping. So,
here if you see the command that we ran,
okay, docker run hyphen P 8080 {colon}
80 Nginx. Okay, so I'll explain what
this thing means because this is
something new and this enabled us to
access the
uh
welcome page that is running on port
8080. Okay, so let me explain this. So,
see, whenever you are running a docker
container, okay, it's running like this.
Like So, this time we had Nginx
running uh inside a docker container.
Okay? Now, what happens is whenever you
are running Nginx inside a docker
container or anywhere on your local
machine as well, you have access to a
uh welcome page, which is running on
port 8080. Inside So, this time since
Nginx was running inside a docker
container, this port 8080 was accessible
or was uh
exposed within the docker container.
Now, this is this entirely is running on
our local machine, right? So, this is
our computer.
Now, since this 8080 port is inside the
Docker container, it's not accessible
from our host machine. Right? So, if you
are if you have a let's say browser
running over here. So, let's say this is
our browser.
This is our browser, and if you try to
access
this port from here, you won't be able
to access. Why you won't be able to
access? Because this port is not mapped
or not accessible from your host
machine. What is your host machine? Host
machine is your machine where you are
running the Docker container in this
case.
Right? So, that is your host machine.
So, this won't be
since this port is not mapped, this is
not accessible. And that is why in the
first try when we tried accessing it, we
were getting an error. All right? So,
what we did is we ran this with {hyphen}
p option. Now, what is {hyphen} p
option? So, with {hyphen} p, you can map
the port on your local host machine
to a port within a Docker container. So,
we said So, this is syntax {hyphen} p,
and you can mention host port, and then
you can specify a column, and you can
say container port
over here, like so. Okay? So, you said
8080 over here. So, the port on your
machine, which is 8080, got mapped to
8080 inside the container. Okay? So,
whenever now the request is coming in
from
your host machine to port 8080, it is
automatically forwarded to port 8080
within the container because of this
option that you have mentioned. Okay? I
hope this is making sense.
This is the concept of port mapping,
people. Okay? And you can map ports of
your host machine to any port within the
container with the help of this option.
The only thing that you have to do is
you have to mention this flag {hyphen}
p. This is called as flag or an option.
Okay? Whatever you want to call it. So,
you can make use of this flag {hyphen}
p, and you can mention the host port
first that you want to map and the
container port to which you want this to
get mapped. Okay? And whenever any
request goes to the host port, it will
be automatically forwarded to the port
within the container and you will see
the actual output or as if you're
running this
this or as if you're running this
request within the container. So, in a
similar way here in our case, if you see
we said see, we had the welcome page
within the container on port 8080. So,
what we said is we said hyphen p
So
port on my host machine, which is 8080,
which is on my Windows machine, map it
to the port
inside the container and that is how I'm
able to access this
by just typing in localhost 8080.
I hope this is absolutely making sense
to you all. And this option of port
mapping is very commonly used and if
you're making use of Docker a lot, you
will be using this option a lot. Okay? I
hope this is making sense and this is
giving you clarity. So, imagine you have
an application like Node.js application.
It's running within the container on
port 3000 and you want to access it from
your local machine.
So, you will have to do port mapping
this way.
Right? If you're running a Spring Boot
application, it's running on port 8080
within the container, you'll have to do
port mapping this way if you want to
access it or if you want your
application to be accessible from your
machine. Right? So, this will be very
important people. Okay? Now, another
thing you'll make notice over here is if
you're running Hello World container.
Okay? Hello World container is not
designed to run continuously. It stops
after a while, right? It stops after
showing you the output, right? But this
particular container is running
continuously and it is not stopped
unless and until you explicitly stop it.
Okay? So, if you see over here, if you
go to Docker you will see
that if you go to container, okay? In
containers you will see if you expand
this a bit, you will see this particular
container, which is of Engine X, is
running continuously. It's It's running,
see? Over here.
So, this is one previous container of
Engine-X which we stopped, okay? Then we
have Hello World container which gets
stopped automatically.
Right? So, if I open a new instance of
PowerShell over here,
if I clear this out and if I say docker
run hello world, you can see it ran and
it stopped automatically.
Okay? You can see it ran and it stopped
now automatically. Did I stop it
explicitly? No, it stopped
automatically. So, what I mean over here
is some containers are designed to stop
automatically and some containers are
designed to run as long as you stop
them, right? So, Engine-X web server,
because this is a web server, so you can
see it will keep on running until and
unless you stop it explicitly. And you
will keep seeing all the logs,
right? You can see you'll keep seeing
all the logs over here. And you can see
here we accessed 8080, so you can see it
it's showing you that output over here
that someone accessed. Now, if if I
access it once again, if I refresh this
once again, and if I come over here, you
will see more logs over here. You can
see. Right? So, so it's occupying one
terminal over here. Now, let's say if I
don't want it to occupy this terminal
and run it in a background, there is
another option wherein I can run this
container in a detached mode, okay? So,
let me stop this. I've stopped this.
I've stopped this using control C. So,
that will exit it, okay? Now, this is
the command that I ran over here, docker
run {hyphen} p.
And uh this is for port mapping. Now, I
can pass in which is {hyphen} d.
Now, what is {hyphen} d for? {Hyphen} d
is to run this container in detached
mode. So, if you press enter now, you
can see you are able to make use of this
particular terminal over here.
And uh it's no longer occupying this
terminal with the logs, right? So, in
the earlier case, when you were not
running it in the detached mode, what is
happening is this terminal was fully
occupied. And if you shut this terminal,
the container will also stop. That was
the case because it was strongly tied to
this terminal. Right? It was displaying
all the logs. And if you shut the
terminal, the Docker container is also
going to stop. But that is not the case
now because we are running it in
background in detached mode. And this is
known as detached mode, {hyphen} d.
Right? So, this is an option that you
you have to mention. And here you will
see the output as the container ID. And
uh this is the container ID. You can see
db8f. So, you can see db
8fe. And that is what you're seeing over
here, db8fe.
Right? So, this is the container you are
running. And if you click on this, you
will see all the logs over here.
Right? You have to click on this.
You'll see all the logs inside.
Okay? And it's running since 54 seconds,
you can see.
Right? So, this is another option which
is {hyphen} d that allows you to run the
container in the background. Now, there
is one more option that I would want to
show you which is using which you can
name the container. So, here now the
names that are being generated, you can
see
they're all random.
Have we given these names? No. They're
generated randomly. So, what you can do
is you can say you can mention a name of
the container. So, here uh you can say
after {hyphen} d, I'll pass in one more
flag which is name over here.
Okay? And I'll mention my
nginx, something like this. And I'll
press enter.
Okay, failed to set up the container.
Okay. My nginx. Okay, this is because uh
you know, it it's not able to do because
uh this container is already running.
So, you have this container already
running. And
its port is mapped to my host port 8080.
Okay? So, it is not able to map port
8080 again to this container because
my host port 8080 is already engaged.
So, I'll have to stop this.
Okay? But you can see this container is
already created, but it did not start
because the binding failed. Okay, so let
me run this again. Okay, it won't run
again because the container with this
name already exist. So, I'll say my
Engine-X and I'll mention new over here.
And I'll press enter. Now, you'll see my
Engine-X new is created over here.
Right? So, container name has to be
unique. If you try to create one more
container with the same name, you will
get an error. So, you can see my
Engine-X new is created and you can see
over here the port mapping as well. You
can see the port mapping over here.
The port is mapped. So, the first
container that we ran of Engine-X, we
did not have any sort of port mapping.
You know, we ran that for demonstration
that we are not able to access 8080. So,
you can see there's no port mapped over
here. But, here now you can see port is
mapped and you have a link over here
also to click. So, if you click on this,
it will take you to localhost 8080.
Okay? You have an option to stop uh you
can stop it from here as well. These
containers or run it from here. You have
a command to stop the container as well.
So, you can say Docker stop and you can
mention the container name.
Engine-X, something like that. And this
will just throw it will just give you
the container name and you'll see the
container is stopped. Okay, my Engine-X
new is the name.
Like so.
Okay, so this will stop again.
Can you see? Right? So, this is
uh these are some commands that help you
get up to speed with Docker. What did we
learn? Okay.
First thing is you learned how you can
run containers, how you can run images,
how you can make containers from images.
You understood what is the difference
between running container in foreground
as well as background. We also covered
how you can stop the containers. We
covered an important concept of port
mapping, which enabled us to map a port
from our host machine to that of
containers. And uh with the help of port
mapping, it enabled us to access uh a
page or any sort of uh thing that is
being exposed by our application that is
running inside the container via our
host machine. Okay? And we also learned
how you can make use of
detached mode, how you can name the
containers, all these options we
covered. And we also learned one more
thing, you can have multiple containers
running at once from the same image. So,
for example, I can run the Engine X
instance, Engine X image is only one.
There's only one Engine X image on our
system. But you can create 10 Engine X
containers that are running at the same
time and they are mapped to different
different ports. You can do that. So, 10
instances of Engine X running at any one
given point in time. You can do that.
All right? If you want to see, let me
show that to you as well. So, what I
will do is I'll I'll run this container.
Okay. So, there there is this container
already with this name. So, I'll just
delete this containers, these two
containers. Okay? And I'll clear this.
Okay? So, we'll first uh run this
container. Okay? So, this is first
container. What I will do is I'll create
another container and I'll map this to
8081 on my local machine. And instead of
Engine X new, I'll just say my Engine X.
Okay? This is one.
And then over here, I'll map this to
8082 and I'll say Engine X
uh 8082, like so.
Okay? And I'll say enter. So, you can
see three containers are now running
from the same image.
And they all are accessible on different
uh different web pages. So, 8080
there is one accessible at 8081, you can
see.
Uh there is another one accessible at
8082. And if you go to 8083, there won't
be anything that is accessible because
we don't have anything mapped over
there.
Right? So, it it's just uh it just won't
work.
Right? So, this is how you can have This
is a relationship actually between
containers and images as well. You can
have multiple containers being created
and ran executed at once from a single
image.
Okay? I hope this has been useful and I
hope you all have been able to follow
along.
So, now is a challenge time. And uh the
benefit of this challenge is it is going
to allow you to reinforce all the
concepts that you have learned so far
and uh get you going hands-on with
everything that we have learned, okay?
So, [snorts] here on Docker Hub, what I
will encourage you is to search for
embarkx over here. embarkx. If you
search for embarkx, you will see over
here uh all these images coming, right?
embarkx/hellospring. So, you can click
on this embarkx/hellospring.
Okay? And uh the moment you click on
this, you will see this image is by
embarkx. Now, this is my username. And
uh we have hosted few Docker images over
here for you all to play around with,
all right? And uh you can see these
images over here. So, don't look at this
other images, just these images that you
see. So, here embarkx/hellonode,
hellopython, and hellospring. Okay? You
can look at all three, any one. You can
even pick any one. And I like the name
says, this first image, hellonode, is
the image uh basically which says hello,
and it's built using Node.js. This other
image that we see over here is uh
is is also an image uh or is also an
application that says hello, and it's
built using Python. And uh this
hellospring, like the name says, it says
hello again. And it's built using Spring
Boot. Okay? So, these are different
applications, and uh the goal is to try
out everything that you have learned,
all the commands so far with all these
uh images. Okay? So, if you click on
hellospring, for example,
you will see a lot of details over here.
Okay? How you can get the image onto
your local machine, and how you can run
it. Okay? So, so you can play around
with this, and uh try it out. The
different images will run on different
ports, like Python application will run
on port 3000 in the container, but you
can map it, of course, to any port on
your local machine. Okay? So, you can
try out few commands, and then I'll uh
I I So, pause this video, and then play
this video to see
how I play around with these images.
So, I hope you all got a chance to pause
the video, and welcome back. I hope
you tried port mapping, the dash mode,
and all the concepts that we have seen
so far. Now, what I will do is I'll
click on this hello spring image, okay?
And here you're going to see these
commands as well, and this is the name
of the repository. So, what I'm going to
do is I'm going to come over to my
terminal, and here I'm going to say
clear, okay? And
let me see if there is anything already
running on port 8080.
Okay, so there are a few containers that
are running on port 8080. Okay, so I'll
just stop all of them. You can select
all and stop. So, I've stopped
everything on my system. Now, what we
will do is see, here you can see docker
pull command. Now, what is docker pull?
Okay? So, till now what we have seen is
you can run an image, so you can say
docker run, and you can say hyphen p,
and you can mention 8080. You can map
the port to that of within the
container, and here you can mention the
embarkx/hellospring,
like so.
Okay? So, this is the name of the
repository, and you can run it in
detached mode as well, like hyphen d.
Okay? So, if you say enter, what this is
going to do is this is going to pull the
image onto your local machine, and then
it is going to run if the image is not
found on your machine. So, pulling will
happen first. Pulling means downloading
the image onto your system, okay? But,
let us say if I want to pull the image
first and then run it, okay? So, I can
also run a pull command first. So, I'm
just copying this, okay? And I can say
docker
pull, and I can say embarkx/hellospring.
So, I want to download this image onto
my system, but not run it. So, I'll just
say docker pull, and it will just pull
this image using this default tag, which
is latest. And you can see this image is
bought onto my local machine. And if you
go over here,
uh it's it's the pull is not yet
complete, but it's downloading, and
it'll take a while depending on the
image size and all.
So, we'll wait for a while until this
process completes, okay? But you can see
it's extracting in layers, and it's
downloaded, okay? And you can see the
image appear over here. Now, there is no
container that is making use of this
image, so you will see her unused over
here. This is not green dot.
This is a black and white dot, okay?
So, so yeah, this is the process of
pulling. So, pulling means just getting
the image onto your system. It's like
downloading image onto your system. You
can even directly say docker run and
mention the image name, and if the image
is not mentioned onto your system, it
will anyways download it first and then
run it, okay? So, if you run this
command over here, docker run, something
like this, you can see it's now
running over here, and you can see now
the image is in use, and now you can
come over here in containers tab, and
you can see sleepy lovelace is the name
of the image, nice name by the way. And
uh you can see we are exposing port
8080. So, now if you come over here,
and if you refresh this, earlier we were
running nginx on our uh we were mapping
uh nginx port 8080 from the nginx
container on our local machine. So, if
you refresh this, now it's mapped to the
spring project, okay? So, I'm not seeing
uh
I'm not
able to access this. Why is it so?
All right, I understood the issue over
here. So, the application is running on
port 8080.
Uh so, if you see the uh page also over
here, it is running on 8080, but we have
mapped it to port 80 only. So, this
needs to change. Uh so, I'll just do
uh docker stop over here, okay? So, you
can even do docker stop using the
container ID.
So, I can just mention this entire
container ID over here, and the
container will stop. Okay? Now, I can
run this command again with a better
uh with the right port, in fact. Okay?
So, I'll say 80, and here I'll mention
80 like so.
>> [snorts]
>> Okay? Now, if you come over here and if
you try to access it, it is going to
work. You can see the API is working
fine. Okay?
So, you can see it's working absolutely
okay, and the application is up and
running. Right? So, you can try this
with any of the applications that are
hosted. Like I mentioned, there are
three applications: Node, uh this is for
uh Python, and this is for Spring.
Okay? So, if you see for Spring over
here, okay, I've tried
this option, hyphen d, hyphen
p, and you can even try hyphen name over
here. Okay? I'll just show you running
one more image over here. Uh so, if you
go to Hello Python.
So, this is the Python image, and uh you
can simply say run this. Okay? Something
like this. So, here what you're doing is
you are running this on your local
machine, and uh you are mapping the port
3000 to that of 3000, okay, on within
the container. So, if you run this,
okay, it is going to first pull the
image
from uh from Docker Hub, and it'll take
a while, okay, depending on the image
size and your internet connection. But,
we'll wait for a while, and if you try
to access localhost:
colon
3000,
it should work.
You can see it's working.
Right? So, output is the container ID.
It is giving the container ID over here.
So, you can see the container ID. Right?
This is the container ID that you're
getting. Okay? Uh you're getting no env
set, and you're getting the uh message
over here as hello from simple app.
Okay? And here you're getting the
similar message, hello from simple app
Spring Boot, container ID, and there is
no env set. All right?
So, I hope this is helpful.
So, now is the time that we begin
talking about the biggest superpower of
Docker. So, Docker solves the problem of
it works on my machine. Now, what does
it mean when I say it works on my
machine? See, generally when you're
working in teams or when you're working
for large companies, you're always going
to work in teams, right? And uh in teams
a lot of people will be committing and
pushing code. So, they'll be writing,
committing, pushing code to a remote
repository that exist. All right? And
different people are going to have
different set of dependencies and
different software versions installed on
their machine. And you cannot control
that. Right? So, what do what will
happen What used to happen earlier on is
uh one person wrote the code, uh you
know, so uh person A.
Okay, let's say one person wrote the
code and that person is going to have uh
the dependency of a particular version.
Let's say he has a dependency of version
1.0 installed onto his system. Okay?
Then if this same
code is being executed on someone else's
machine, it might throw an error because
that person might had might have
another version of the same dependency
installed, which is version 2.0. Right?
So, the dependency is same, everything
is same, the operating system is same,
just that the version mismatch happens.
Right? And this is the case everywhere,
you know? So, what Docker does is Docker
solves the problem by adding containers.
Now, within containers you have a lot of
other things like uh you have things
like uh dependencies, so if I have to
mention what all it has, it has
dependencies, okay?
Code.
All the everything, okay? Libraries.
Everything it has packed. Like whatever
the application needs, it it is packed
into this particular container. Okay? It
is packed into this particular container
and as a result, you don't need to
install all these softwares because the
application is running in a container
and uh it has everything that it needs
to work. All right? And because of this,
a major superpower comes in with Docker,
which is of platform independence. So,
any kind of application, whether it's
written in any sort of programming
language, Python, Node.js, Spring Boot,
Go, you can run it on your system just
with Docker. So, let me give you an
example. So, here, if you come to our
official repository,
embarkx, you're going to see three
application hosted over here. So, you
can type in the URL directly. Okay? So,
you can see the URL listed over here.
Okay, this is the URL. hub.dockerhub.com
{hyphen} or sorry, {slash} u {slash}
embarkx. Or you can search for embarkx
on the search bar over here. All right?
You will come on this repository, and
here you're going to see three images.
These three images are same uh are the
images of the same functionality. So,
they expose a Hello, World API, but
they're written in different programming
language. Like Hello, Node. So, this
Hello, Node is written in Node.js.
Hello, Python is written in Python, and
Hello, Spring is written in written in
Spring Boot. All right? So, what I'm
going to do is I'm going to run all
three images onto my system without
installing their corresponding software.
So, I'm not going to have Node.js
installed onto my software, but I'm
going to be able to run this Node.js
image onto my system. I'm not going to
have Python, but still this Python image
will run. I'm not going to have Spring
Boot or Java installed, but still this
is going to run without Java on my
system. So, if you come over here,
okay? If you see clear, okay? Let us try
first with Node, then with Python, and
then with Spring. Okay? So, we'll go to
Node, and you'll see this
uh command over here, docker run
{hyphen} p. So, the application within
the container runs on port 3000, and we
are exposing it to 3000 port on a local
machine. Okay? So, I'm going to copy
this, and I'm going to run this.
Okay? So, it's not going to find this
image, but it is going to pull this
image and it is going to run it locally
by exposing this port. Oops, I forgot
one flag, which is of detached mode. I
forgot that, so it is going to occupy
this terminal. You can see
it's occupying Okay, this port is
already allocated, so this port is
already being used. And you can see it's
being used, so I'll just select all and
I'll just say stop all the containers.
So, it's going to stop everything.
And now let me run this in detached
mode, okay?
So, I'll run this in detached mode and
now you'll see the container is running.
Okay? So, you can see a new container
created over here. And now if you go to
3000 over here, you will see
hello over here. And this is the
container ID that you're seeing.
Right? You can see container ID. Okay?
Now, I'm going to run the same command
for Python as well. So, if you go to the
Python repo, you can see it's exposing
port 3000 again. So, I'll just copy
this. Okay? And we have port 3000
already utilized on our machine for that
of node. So, what I will do is I'll just
add this flag -d and here I'll change
this to 4000. Okay? So, on my local
machine it is being mapped to port 4000,
but within the container the port is
3000 only.
So, I'll come over here.
And uh now if I duplicate this and if I
say 4000 here,
>> [bell]
>> like so.
You'll see this is the Python app, which
is uh using the framework called Flask,
which enables us to write uh REST APIs.
So, I've created this and you can see
the container is this and this is the
container ID that you saw over here as
well. We can also do this for our Spring
Boot uh
or the Docker image that makes use of
Spring Boot. So, I'll copy this.
Come over here.
Add it in detached mode, right? And then
just run it. You can see it's running
here. And if you come here, 8080,
earlier there was nothing running over
here, but now you can see Spring Boot
application.
So three applications with same
functionality, okay? So right now it's
same functionality. You might have three
applications with different
functionality, okay? And they're running
on my system without the need of the
software, okay? So I don't need Java to
run this Docker image that is running a
Spring Boot application, right? I don't
need Java onto my system. I just need
Docker. Because within the container
it is going to have everything like from
Java to everything that it's need,
right?
Here, this application is making use of
Node.js. Now, I might not have Node.js
installed onto my system, but still this
application is going to run because it's
written in Node.js and it's running
within the container with all the
dependencies installed and available
within the container for it to function
normally, right? So I don't need to have
all the dependencies onto my system, and
same goes for this Python app as well. I
might not have Python installed onto my
system. I might not have the right
version of Python installed that this
app needs, but still it is going to
function in the same way without Flask
installed. So this is making use of
Flask. So all of this is available
within the container and it's running as
a container in an isolated manner,
right? So three applications with
different programming languages run
perfectly fine onto your system, and
this is the major superpower. Without
any dependencies installed, you did not
do anything. You just ran the image, and
it's working fine. So yes, Docker
enables your application to be platform
independent, meaning you can run this
application on any machine that does not
need the setup to run the application.
You just need
a Docker installed, okay? And this is an
amazing magic. This is a real
superpower. You write your code anywhere
and run it everywhere. Same output, no
setup issues, and this solves the
problem of it works on my machine
forever. Okay? So, generally,
during
like before Docker, people or
development team will always say to the
infra guys that, "Hey, it works on my
machine. I don't know why it's not
working on production server. It's
working on my machine, so the
application is working fine." You know?
And poor production guys will do the job
of figuring out, "Okay, why is is it not
working over there? What is a dependency
mismatch?" and all of that. Okay? That
problem is solved with Docker, and this
indeed is a superpower.
So, now is the time that we begin
talking about the life cycle of Docker
containers. Now, it's not like you
create a Docker container and it just
starts running. Uh okay, there are a few
life cycle stages that you should be
aware of. So, these are the life cycle
stages. You have create, start, stop,
restart, and then remove. Okay? So,
create means this is the stage wherein
the container gets created with a
container ID dedicated to it. Right? So,
this is just a creation. The container
has not started running, but yes, it is
configured to start running. Okay? Then,
the next stage is when the container
starts running. It actually starts
running, and whatever is there inside
the container you is exposed based on
uh how you are running the container.
Stop is the stage wherein the container
that was in the start stage is being
stopped, which the container exists, but
it's not yet running. It It's stopped
now, right? So, that is the stop stage,
and then you have restart container. So,
if you wish to do a restart, the ID
remains the same, but the container is
restarted. Okay? And then you have
remove, wherein the container is deleted
from the system. Okay? So, stop is when
the container is stopped, it's no longer
running, and removal is the container is
deleted or removed. So, in stop stage,
the container is not deleted, okay, but
it's stopped. It The container ID is
still allocated or still assigned to
that container, and it can start running
if it moves to the start stage. So, this
is the complete life cycle
of Docker containers. And what I'm going
to do is I'm actually going to go
hands-on and show these life cycle to
you. So, what I'm going to do is I'm
going to clear everything out, okay? And
now,
you can see over here all the containers
running over here. There are three
containers running, right? Now, I'll
also show you few commands that
that will help you see
see what containers what images exist on
your system, okay? So, you can make use
of course of Docker UI or Docker Desktop
to see which containers are running and
which are stopped. But, there is a
command called Docker PS,
which tells you which Docker which
Docker containers are running right now.
So, if you run Docker PS, you're going
to see over here three containers that
are running,
right? So, you don't need to switch to
the UI. Or if you're running or if
you're working on a system which does
not have a UI like
you have uh connected to a remote server
using SSH. So, you can make use of these
commands, right? So, you're seeing these
are the three containers that are
running. Now, you can stop these three
containers, right? So, I can say uh
Docker stop.
Okay, and uh I can
uh make use of this container ID. So,
you can see this is stopped. You can
again say Docker stop, and you can pass
in the container ID over here. Okay, and
you can stop it. And then, you can say
Docker stop, and you can
uh pass in this last container ID, okay?
And it is going to stop it.
Okay? Now, if you run Docker PS over
here, you're going to see there are no
containers running. And this particular
command gives you container ID, image,
the command,
okay? Command as in the command that is
uh running inside the Docker container
to run the app. Okay, so since this was
a Python app, you can see Python mean
py.
Okay, this was Hello Spring. So, there
was some command that was running. This
was uh uh a Node.js app, so there was
some command running over here. Okay,
status meaning what is the status?
And uh status is up, you can see all the
containers were in up stage, ports, and
then the container names.
Now, what I'm going to do is I'm going
to clear this out, okay?
And uh let us do or let us play around
with the life cycle, okay? So, what I'm
going to do is I'm going to say uh
Docker
create. Okay, I'm going to make use of
this command. I'm going to say name, and
this is going to have for app one as the
name. Okay, and I'm going to say hyphen
p
3,000, and uh okay, one second. So, this
is 2,000 accidentally typed in.
So, this will be 3,000 colon 3,000, and
you can pick any image. So, one image
I'll pick in is for Python, maybe.
And uh you can take this. So, you have
to make sure that within the container
also it's running on 3,000, okay? If
you're mentioning 3,000 over here,
because this is the container side.
Right? So, I'll just paste this image.
And I'll say enter.
Now, over here you can see you got
container ID over here. Right? This is
the container ID.
Now,
the container is created, the container
ID is assigned to it, but it is not
running. So, if you scroll down over
here, you can see this container is not
yet running. Okay? It exists, it is
created, container ID is assigned to it,
but it's not running. And this is a
stage wherein you can see create stage.
We are on create stage right now, right?
So, this is the first stage of the life
cycle. Now, one question you might have
is
why create a container? Why not directly
run it? Right?
We can directly run it using Docker run
command. Why create a container first?
What What is the use case over here we
are talking about? Okay? So, see
if uh if you want to run it, you can of
course run it and first the container is
created and then it will go to the start
stage in the life cycle.
Right? If you directly make use of
Docker run. So, first container is
created in the background and then it
runs. Right? So, this stage anyways
happens in the background. It's just
that you were not seeing it. But, there
will be scenarios wherein you might want
to create or configure a container
before running it for advanced workflows
or advanced CI/CD workflows that your
team might have written. So, there might
be a situation wherein you might want to
create a container, then do something in
it, and then start it. So, in that use
case, if you have that sort of a use
case, then you might want to create a
container first, do something, and make
sure that the container is created, ID
is assigned, you do something, and then
you start it. Right? So, in that case
you might run this command manually,
Docker create. Docker create hyphen name
app1. App1 is the container name and
I've mapped it to this port.
Okay? Now, this is
uh Docker create. Now, if you have
created a container and if you want to
start it, how would you do it? So, you
can say Docker start app1, something
like this. And you can see it's running.
Now, one question uh you might have is
what is Docker start? Why Docker start
command? There There was Docker run
command, right? Which we used to run the
containers. Why we using Docker start
over here? What What is this new command
and what is the difference between run
and start over here? So, let me clear
out over here. So, Docker run command
creates a new container from the image
and starts it.
What does Docker run command do? It
creates a new container from the image
and starts it. But, Docker start will
only restart or start a previous
container that has been created or
stopped.
Okay, so if you want to start an already
existing container, you have to make use
of Docker start. And now if you say
docker ps, you're going to see this
container is up and running. All right,
and you can see it over here as well.
Oops, so here also you can see app one
is running. Right? So this is docker
start. Okay? Now we have seen the create
stage, we have seen the start stage,
okay? Uh you can even make use of run,
okay? So run command basically is a
combination of create and start. So
these two commands combine to form a run
command. So you can say docker run and
you can mention like all these same
things, okay? So it is going to first
create the container and then it is
going to start. All right, I hope this
is making sense. And then you have
docker stop. So you can say docker stop
and you can say app one like so and it
is going to stop the container. Now if
you do docker ps, you won't have any
running container instances out there,
okay? So we have seen create, start,
stop. There is an option to restart the
container as well. So you can say uh so
let me start the container. Docker start
app one. You can say docker restart app
one, okay? And what this will do is this
will restart. So it'll stop this
container and then it'll restart it,
okay? So I think the restart was quick,
so we didn't get to see, okay?
So you can see it's restarting over
here, okay? It's quickly restarting, so
we are not get- getting a chance to see
that it's restarting, but it's
restarting the application. Okay? So it
restart the same container. And why
would you restart the container? So you
might want to do restart for several
reasons, okay? But a thing to remember
over here is the container ID remains
the same and storage and all if your
container is using all that remains the
same. Okay? So container is not
destroyed. If you want to remove the
container, so you can see over here
restart and after restart you have
remove. If you wish to remove the
container, so you can say docker rm and
you can say app one over here.
Something like this. Okay, cannot remove
the container of the container is
running. So, you will have to stop the
container first. Okay, stop app one.
And then you'll have to remove app one
like so. Okay, so now if you see the
container itself is deleted. So, here
you app one container won't be there.
It's deleted right now.
Right? So, this was the entire life
cycle
of uh
with of Docker containers, okay? And we
took a look at it along with an example,
okay?
Uh and uh yeah, I don't think we have
anything left to cover here for from the
life cycle standpoint. You just need to
remember these life cycle stages:
create, start, stop, restart, and
remove. I hope this has been useful.
So, let's start talking about image tag
and versioning, okay? So, what is a tag?
So, tag is basically a name or a label
assigned to an image version. And when
you're working with softwares, and if
you're making use of Docker, you would
be aware that every software has
different versions. Like you might have
a dev version, prod version, you might
have latest version, okay? So, version
How would you identify a version? So,
you would basically name them. So, you
would have a dev version. So, if a image
is labeled as dev,
it means that it's a dev version. You
might have even V1 V2 version, you might
have the latest version. So, I have some
labels mentioned over here. So, this is
the image my app and then you have the
tag. And tag with image name is
displayed or mentioned with the help of
a colon. So, my app is the image name
colon latest. So, it means that we are
referring to the image my app with
latest tag over here. Okay, that is what
a Docker tag is. Now, let me show this
to you
as to how Docker tag is represented on
Docker Hub.
So, here I am on Docker Hub.
And if you open any of this image like
Hello Node, Hello Python, or Hello
Spring, let me open Hello Node. So,
you're going to see over here, these are
the tags. So, this is the overview of
the repository. And if you click on
tags, you will see different tags
available and are associated with this
particular image. So, you can see this
is the
tag called stable, okay? Then you have
tag This is
version 1.0. Then you have tag latest,
okay? So, there are three tags that are
available and you you can actually pull
and make use of any of these tags. So,
if you wish to get this tag or like this
image with this tag onto your machine,
you can do that.
If you want to get version 1.0, you can
run this command. And if you want this,
so you can run this command. They all
three are different, but it's the same
image, okay? Now, if you don't specify a
tag, okay, one thing you need to
understand if you don't specify the tag,
it defaults to the latest version.
Okay, it defaults to the latest tag, all
right? And with that, let me head over
to command line and I'll just clear
everything out. I have I have had few
commands already running up over there,
okay? Now, what I'm going to do is let
us pull an image. Okay, so what I will
do is I'll go to images over here. And
let me delete these
image, okay? Or let me delete
everything. So, I'll just delete spring
over here, okay? Hello Spring. Let me
delete this.
Okay, okay, some container is using it,
so I'm not able to delete it. Okay, so
if you go over here,
okay? I'll just delete all these
containers, okay? So, we can delete all
this.
Okay, and then I'll come over here and
I'll just delete Hello Spring.
Okay? So, this image is deleted. Now, of
course, what you saw over here is I was
not able to delete an image if a
container is already created using that
image. So, you cannot do that. One thing
for you to know, okay? Now, if you come
over here, okay, Hello Spring is what
I've deleted and if I go back
and if I open Hello Spring over here,
you will see there are different tags
over here, right? So, I can get the
uh
1.0, okay, version 1.0 and I can like
run this. So, I'm pulling the image with
this tag and you can see how the image
tag is mentioned over here. It is
separated by colon. So, there is a colon
between the tag and the image name, as
you can see over here. It is downloading
the entire image like this, okay? You
can see. And uh it if you come over
here, so once this process is complete,
now this process might take a while
depending on your system speed and the
internet speed, but it has downloaded
this, okay? It it just took some time
and you can see over here,
embarkx Hello Spring and the tag is this
one.
And before that, whatever images I have
used are all latest because I never
specified the tag, right? I never
specified the tag, so everything is
latest. So, this confirms that if you
don't mention the tag, okay, what is
going to be fetched is going to be
latest because latest is the default
one, okay? Now, latest might not mean
the newer version. It just means that uh
so, latest is not
So, by the name latest, it might seem
that latest means the new version,
right? But actually, it's not the new
version. It's the image that
was most recently tagged as latest.
Okay? Latest is the name of the tag.
Okay? So, never rely on on latest in
production.
Never rely on latest in production. In
production, you should make use of
proper versions, all right? I hope uh
this is uh making sense. And you can
pull multiple images, okay? So, I I have
this one over here, which is version
1.0. I'll get the stable one also. So,
I'll come over here and I'll get the
stable one. Okay? And while running the
image, you will see So, you can see
stable and this one. Both are here. Now.
Right? So, stable is also here and while
running you can also mention uh the uh
name of the tag. Okay? So, that is
something also you can do. Okay?
So, I'll just edit this one, okay, and
instead of 3030, sorry, 3,000, I'll just
mention 8080 and here also I'll mention
8080 like so. Okay? And uh here instead
of hello node, I'll mention hello spring
and uh the tag is v1.0.0
like so. And if you press enter, you
will see this container is up and
running and now you can go to containers
and you'll see this container. It is
making use of this particular image.
Okay? So, if I expand this, you can see
it is making use of this tag over here.
Right? The tag is also mentioned. Right?
So, this is working and this is how you
can make use of tags. Okay?
So, just to reiterate everything that we
have discussed so far, okay, a Docker
tag is a version label attached to an
image. Docker run uses latest latest tag
if no tag is specified. Latest is the
default and latest is not safe for
production. So, generally if you're
looking at a production uh if you're
working on production grade scenarios,
then don't make use of latest. It might
not be safe for production because
latest does not mean the best version
out there, right? And using semantic
versions
uh is important over here to make sure
that there is consistency. Like for
example, 1.0.0. This is a semantic
version. Okay? And always pull and run
specific tags for predictable deployment
outcomes. Okay? So, have a habit of uh
making sure that you use tag always when
you're making use of Docker commands or
an images.
I hope this has been useful.
So, now is the time that we take a look
at how you can view logs and debug
inside containers, okay? Because viewing
logs and all is a part of the process
and there will be scenarios wherein you
might want to do that. So, let us come
over here. I'm going to say Docker
PS. Now, when you run this, it is going
to give you a list of all the containers
that are running right now along with
the container ID. Now, you can make use
of this container ID and do a lot of
things with it. Now, what is a container
ID first of all, okay? So, container ID
is basically a
SHA-256 hash basically that is assigned
to a container as its unique identifier.
Now, here you can see a few characters.
I believe 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12.
So, these are 12 to 14 characters that
are being displayed over here as
container ID on the terminal. But, if
you go over here,
here you will see a fewer, okay? But,
actually container ID is pretty much
longer, okay? So, here here also you can
see
not the entire container ID, but it's a
shorter version. Okay, do we have the
complete container ID
somewhere over here? It's not there,
okay? But, what I can do is I can run a
new container and I can show it to you,
okay? So, what I will do is I'll
run something like this and instead of
hello spring or instead of mapping it to
port 8080, I'll map it to port 8081. So,
we'll have two containers with the same
image or using the same image, okay?
I'll run this and you can see this
container ID is pretty long, right? So,
this is a full container ID. And if you
run Docker PS now, you will see a
shorter version of the same container ID
that you saw over here, All Now, should
we use
short container ID or should we use the
complete container ID? So, let me show
that to you. So, when you make use of a
commands to watch logs inside your
container, you'll have to make use of
container ID. Okay, so I'll just open a
new terminal session. Okay, so I'll say
clear over here. I'll say docker logs.
This is the command. And now over here,
you can make use of the container ID.
So, I'll just take this entire container
ID and I'll just paste it over here.
Now, you can see the entire logs over
here. You can see what's happening
inside the container. Right? So, you can
see the application is started over
here. Right? Now, what I can do is I can
even use the shortened container ID. So,
I can copy this and I can come over
here. I can say docker logs and I'll run
this.
So, I'll get the same output. Right? So,
whether you are using the complete
container ID
or if you're using a shortened version,
it's still the same. Docker allows you
to do this and this is done
or this is allowed from a convenience
standpoint because we are humans, you
know, and uh remembering or typing in
such long container IDs is not always
possible. So, you might want to use
short form. So, you can even use first
three letters of the containers to get
uh the work done. Okay, so here the
first three letter is E55.
So, I can say docker logs E55, something
like this and you can see I still get
the logs. Okay? But, you have to make
sure
E55 is unique. Right? There should not
be like two, three containers that are
starting from E55, otherwise it will be
a problem. Okay? So, so that's that's
the context. Okay? So, that is the
context of container IDs. Okay? And uh
I'm talking about container IDs over
here and give you a gist of it because,
you know, to view logs, uh you will need
container ID because it should know
which container you wish to uh view the
log for. You can even mention the
container name. Okay, that also can be
done. So over here, this container
What is the name of this container? It's
trusting LS. So I'll just copy this. You
can even make use of this. I'll just say
clear. I can say docker logs and I'll
just paste this. You can see the entire
logs. So either you use the container
name or container ID. A lot of
developers you will see making use of
container ID. So and and you might see
them making use of three letters or like
seven letters of container ID or 10
letters or 14 So you should not get
confused. Even you should be you should
know like docker allows us and that is
why I'm giving you like the different
examples. Okay. Now here you're seeing
the logs. Okay, it printed the logs and
it has forgotten it. Okay, so let me see
over here. So here you saw these logs
and it's forgotten it. Now let me access
the website. So what I will do is I'll
come over here
on 8080 and I'll just refresh this.
Okay, so
did it Did the logs update? Not really.
Okay, but if I
try this again.
Okay, there is no log actually that has
been generated. Okay, so let me try
another container if it's generating the
lock. Okay.
So I'll say docker logs and here I'll
paste this.
Okay, so completed initialization and
this is running on port 3000 I believe.
So let me run this.
Okay, so what I did is I tried running
hello node, hello spring. But if you try
to access them in browser, it is not
updating the log. So what I'm going to
do is I'm going to clear this out. Okay,
and I'm going to make use of a publicly
available image again, which is engine X
because if you access its endpoint it
updates the log in the container and
that is one of the use case that I want
to show you. So what I'm going to do is
I'm going to like run this command over
here.
And instead of hello node over here, I'm
going to mention engine X over here. And
I'll have a port 80 mentioned over here.
And this should be mapped to 8085. Let's
say for example, because 8080 is already
engaged. 8081 on my machine is also
already engaged and I'm running it on
detached mode. Okay, I can also name
this container as uh I'll say name is
uh engine x logs try or engine x logs is
what I'll tell. Okay, and I'll just run
this. So, this container is up and
running. Okay. Now, let us try viewing
logs for this container. So, I'm going
to say okay or I'll come over here and
I'll say clear. Okay, I'll say docker
logs and I'll paste this container ID.
The moment you paste this container ID,
you will see these are the logs that are
being generated in the container. Now,
let me try to access this. So, this is
running on 8085
like so. Okay, you tried accessing the
endpoint. Now, a new set of log is
generated because you tried to access
this endpoint, but you're not seeing the
log update over here because, you know,
this it showed the log and it's not
following the logs live. The logs are
being generated in the container, but
they won't display over here. Okay,
because it just printed the logs that
were generated at that point in time
when you ran this command. So, they are
not updated live. But, if you run this
command again, you'll see the newly
appeared logs over here in the end.
Right? So, you have to basically keep
running this again and again to see how
the logs are updating. Okay, so if I try
to access it again, there will be one
more access over here. You can see
there's one more log over here. Right?
Now, instead of running this log command
again and again, what you can do is you
can basically follow the logs live. So,
you can say
you can mention container ID and you can
make use of hyphen f flag. So, what this
will do is this will follow the logs
live. Now, if you try to access this,
okay, so let me access this over here.
So, I've opened this in split view so
that you can see the logs being updated
live over here. Now, if I try to run
this, okay,
if I try to open this, okay, you should
see the logs appear live. Okay, Let me
refresh. You can see logs being appeared
live. You can see I'm refreshing and
it's being appeared live.
Right? So, the logs are being updated
over here in live manner. Okay, if you
want, you can leave this, okay? The
container won't stop. The container is
running because the container is running
in detached mode. And this command
docker logs {hyphen} f the {hyphen} f
flag allows you to follow the logs in
real time. Okay, that is the benefit of
having {hyphen} f and not having
{hyphen} f, okay? So, this is about
logs, okay? I hope this is making sense.
And uh I hope this has been useful,
okay? Now, I'll show you how we can
execute or how we can get inside the
container, okay? Now, there will be
scenarios, of course, wherein you might
want to get inside the container. Why?
Okay, for whatever reason, yeah, like
you might want to start execute some
commands inside the container. You want
to install a particular software in
inside the container, okay? So, you
might want to do that, okay? Now, I'll
get back to its original size over here.
Okay. Uh so, yeah, this is the original
size of the terminal, okay? You might
want to do that.
So, how can uh you do that uh with the
help of command? So, what you can do is
you can say docker exec
and you can say IT. IT meaning
interactive shell or interactive
terminal, okay? You have to mention the
container uh name or ID and then you can
mention bash or sh. So, if you want to
log in through bash, you can mention
that. If you want to log in through sh,
you can even mention that, okay? So,
this is the container ID and I'm I've
logged in using sh. So, you can see this
over here, okay? And you can like uh run
like commands over here. You can see ls.
So, these are all Linux-based commands.
You can see entrypoint.sh and all of
these. Okay?
So, dev and everything over here. So,
this is uh f526, right? So, this is
f526.
So, which container is this? This is
basically Engine-X container.
Okay? So, I can I can exit this, okay?
If I want to exit, I can just say exit
and I'll be back to my host over here,
okay? So, let us try this with some
other terminal as well, okay? So, Docker
ES over here. You can see tons of
containers running, okay? So, which one
should we try it with? So, this is the
one This is a Node.js one, okay? So,
what I can do is I'll get the container
ID for this and uh not this, okay? So,
this is the Node.js one. I'll copy this.
I'll say
uh Docker exec and I'll mention like
this, okay? I'm inside the container.
I'll say LS over here. So, you can see
Dockerfile, app.js. So, this is my
application file.
Node modules is there because this is a
Node application. You have
package-lock.json
and package.json. If you want to see the
contents inside package.json,
uh what you can do is you can say cat
and package.json. So, this will give you
the entire content within in
inside this particular file, right?
These are all Linux-based commands,
right? If you want to see uh what is
app.js, so you can say cat app.js and
you will see the entire application code
over here. So, it's making use of
Express.js
and it's
running on port 3000, you can see. And
this is the response that you're getting
in the endpoint, right? So, that's the
entire source code within the container,
right? And it's running inside the
container because we have logged in over
there, okay? I'll exit it. Let's take a
look at uh Spring Boot application.
So, here we have Hello Spring. I'll just
copy this container ID and I'll run the
same command, execute IT, and I'll just
log in using SH. Okay? Now, here if I if
you say LS, you will see app.jar.
Why app.jar? Because in Java
uh you will have application packaged
into a JAR file and that JAR file will
run, okay? So, our application that we
are looking for is a JAR file and it's
running inside the container.
Okay? I hope it is making sense, Okay,
you can even try this out with uh uh
Python based Python based uh
uh container. Okay, so I can say a
docker PS. Okay, sorry. Docker PS.
Is uh Python
container running? Is the Python app
running? No, not really. So, what I will
do is I'll just start the Python app
over here.
Okay, so I'll just take a look. Okay,
instead of hello spring, I'll say hello
Python and I'll just change the port.
So, for Python, the port was uh let me
see the port.
Okay, so the internal port within the
container was 3,000. Okay, so instead of
that instead of 8080, I'll have 3,000
mentioned over here.
3,000. Okay, like so.
And here, I'll have 3,005 because if
something is running on 3,000 on my
machine, I don't want it to conflict.
So, I'll say 3,005 just for the safety.
I'll run this. Okay, unable to find this
image. So, what it what it's first going
to do, it is going to download it and
then it's going to run the container.
So, container is up and running. Okay,
you can take first three letters at
least. And uh then you can
go inside. Okay, like so.
Like so. Okay? And then you can say LS
over here. And the moment you say LS,
you will see docker file
main.py.
So, main.py is the main Python file and
then you have requirement.txt. So, if
you're a Python developer, you will know
that uh you know, uh for managing uh
Python environments, you basically need
uh requirements.txt for dependencies and
all. So, you can say cat
requirements.txt.
Oops, requirements.
txt and you can see there is Flask
as a part of the requirement. And you
can see uh cat main.py as well. So, you
can see
it's making use of Flask and it is
returning this as the endpoint. So, this
is the code of our application, right?
So, what we are doing is we are getting
inside the container and we are able to
run any sort of commands. Now, you can
run any sort of command. You can if you
want to install something inside the
container. These are running containers,
right? And these are like running
machines. So you can run anything if you
wish to, right? And for example, if you
check over here Python
3
version
Okay.
So you can see Python 3.10.19.
This is the version of Python inside the
container.
Right? If you exit this and if you SSH
into or if you log into this particular
one, okay, this is going to have this
was the Java application container. So
here you will have Java version. So if
you you can say Java hyphen version
inside the container and you will see
it's running on Java version 21. So Java
version 21 is installed inside the
container. That is what you're seeing
over here.
Right? Now you will say, "Hey, why these
logs and everything like getting inside
the container? All of this matter?" It
matters, okay? Logs
running running logs of an application
tells you everything. It tells you why a
particular container crashed. So if a
container crashes, okay, you don't know
what to do.
Right? What would you do? You don't know
why it crashed. So you will first take a
look at logs as to what happened there.
So you will know you will get answers to
questions like why a particular
container has crashed. If the
application is not responding inside the
container, why is it not responding?
Check the logs, right?
If the port binding is not working
properly, why did not bind? Check the
logs.
If the server didn't start properly, why
did not start? What error did we get?
Check the logs, okay? Errors errors
stack traces warnings all of this you
can find on logs only, right? So the
logs command that we did over here uh
sometime back
uh that I showed you, okay? Uh
oops, I'm not getting the logs command.
One second. So here in the history I
would have logs command. Okay, here
logs.
So these logs command Docker logs and
the container ID or container name and
hyphen f flag if you want to follow it
live. This helps you view logs. And if
you want to get inside container, you
have to make use of docker exec.
So, docker exec lets you diagnose wrong
environment variables, right? Why wrong
environment variables? Because you're
setting environment variables, you might
set environment variables for your
application, right?
Where should they be set? They should be
set inside the container. So, you can
debug that by getting inside the
container like this. And you can see
what environment variable what a
particular environment variable is
holding, right? You might have missing
configuration files, missing
dependencies, permission issues, uh
wrong working directory, app output not
visible in logs. So, for that, you can
log in inside the container and you can
take charge and you can see why there
are missing configuration files. Is a
particular file missing? For example,
your application might not be running
and saying like this file not found. So,
log into the container and see whether
that file actually exist, right? If
there is missing dependencies, so check
whether that dependency is actually
missing from the container. You can
check that, right? For example, I check
Java and Python version, right? So, if
there is a version conflict, if you
check, okay, and then you will know,
okay, the container is having this
version. So, probably the image
definition needs to change, right? So,
all these sort of issues, if there is
permission issue within the container,
you can do all of that using docker
exec.
Right? So, getting inside We We covered
two concepts, getting inside the
container and without getting inside the
container, you can check the logs of the
container or the application, okay? So,
both these things are important. Logs,
like I said, helps you understand
everything about the application, what
happened, why it crashed, why something
is not working well.
And exec, like docker exec and it's
interactive session that we did, okay,
IT, and then we mentioned terminal name
and we went inside the container. This
helps you debug issues like wrong
environment variables or missing config
file, missing dependencies, permission
issues, wrong working directory, all of
this, okay?
So, it's really helpful, and it's a very
helpful
skill for you as a developer, okay? Now,
I I would want to show you few bonus
commands over here, okay? So, if you
want to see
uh like uh last
n lines of a particular container. Like,
you don't want to see all the logs, you
want to uh let's say I want to see last
10 logs of a particular container.
So, what I can do is I can say docker
logs,
okay? And I can say last
uh hyphen tail,
like so, and I can say 10 over here,
okay? So, you will see only last x lines
of a particular container. Now, here the
lines might look
that they're more than 10, because one
line is flowing overflowing into two
over here, because I have zoomed in.
But, if you zoom out over here, you will
see these are actually 10 lines.
Right? So, I'm zoomed in so that you all
can see better, and that is why it might
seem the line is overflowing into
multiple lines, right? A single line is
overflowing into multiple lines. So,
that you all can see properly. But, if
you're zoomed out, you will notice that
these are only 10 last 10 logs that you
are seeing from the container. Okay, if
you want to see the timestamp as well,
so you can add uh hyphen t uh as well.
So, 1 second. So, here I'll get rid of
this, and you can see hyphen t over
here,
and you will get the timestamp as well,
along with the logs. Okay? And you can
view the logs without timestamp as well,
okay? Like so, you can say uh
uh you can get rid of this, okay? And
you can see.
Right? And uh you can even have uh make
use of since over here, since and last 1
minute.
Okay.
And last 1 minute, there's been no log,
right? Last 1 minute, there's been no
log. Last uh let's see last 3 minutes.
No logs, okay? Last 5 minutes.
Or last 6 minutes.
No logs, is it? Last 60 minutes.
Okay, there is there are all the logs,
okay? So, probably last 10 minutes will
give you a decent output, okay? Not last
10.
So, probably this is an old container,
okay? Last 20 minutes, yeah. This is an
old container like that was running that
is running since 20 minutes. So, you're
getting logs in last 20 minutes over
here. So, you can add since flag also.
This is since. Okay? I hope this has
been useful and I hope you all have been
follow along. Now, whether you are a
developer or DevOps engineer, SRE
engineer, whoever you are, these skills
like of checking the logs, you know,
executing commands inside the container,
these are really essential.
These like it does not matter whoever
you are, whether you are a developer or
DevOps engineer, these are really
crucial for anyone. If you're a
developer, you should be able to debug
issues on your own.
Right? If you're a DevOps engineer, you
should be able to debug production
issues, of course. Right? So, these
skills are really important. Don't take
them lightly and practice as I'm showing
you things.
Welcome and now it's time that we take a
look at some of the important Docker
commands that you should be aware of,
all right? And I do have categorized
this into image like commands when
working with images, commands when
working with containers, and so on,
okay? We'll talk about image-based
commands first, okay? So, here what I
can do is I can say the first command
that I will talk about is Docker pull.
Now, of course,
uh you must be aware that Docker pull is
used to pull
image from a remote registry. And uh if
you're not mentioning the registry over
here,
uh then the default registry is Docker
Hub. And you can mention over here Nginx
{colon} latest. So, I can mention the
tag as well. And the moment you mention
enter or you specify enter, you will see
the image is being pulled and uh you get
this ID and you can see image is up to
date, and so on. Right? So, you can pull
the image with a particular tag using
this. Now, if you want to see the list
of images on your machine, you can say
docker images like so.
Okay. Oops.
Images like so. And you will get the
list of all the images that is present
on your machine along with the disk
usage that it is doing. So, disk image
name with the tag, the ID, disk usage,
and the content size inside the uh
image, okay? That is what you're seeing.
Now, if you want to remove any image by
chance, you can say uh docker rmi,
and you can mention the image ID or the
image name. So, let's say I wish to
remove this nginx. So, I can just
mention this over here,
and I can say enter, okay? You won't be
able to remove images if the image is
being used by a particular container,
okay? But there is another command that
can allow you to do so, so you can
mention {hyphen} f over here,
which means force remove the image. So,
this will remove the image even if it's
in use. So, you need to use it
carefully. I won't be using it, but
that's a command that exists. But if you
try to remove it, uh if and and it'll
it'll remove if it's not being used
only, okay? So, this is one command that
you should be aware of. Uh you Yeah. So,
these are the commands that are uh here
for uh image images. Now, I'll clear all
of this, okay? Let's talk about
container commands or commands that you
can make use of with container.
So, you can say docker
create and create a container.
And when I say create a container, it
will just create a container, not run
it, okay? So, you can mention the
container name, so you can say nginx.
Uh nginx uh manual, okay? I'm manually
mentioning the name over here. I'm just
saying manual just for its sake. And uh
you can mention the image as well. So,
it's nginx over here, like so. You can
mention
Oops. So,
what happened over here? Oops, the image
name is incorrect. Okay?
And I'll just press enter. Okay. What
happened?
Okay. The name is two times hyphen.
Okay. So, now it's created. Okay? So,
this is the command over here, and
you'll see the container is created.
Now, if you want to see the list of all
the containers, you can say docker PS
over here. Okay, and you would see uh
the container that you just created over
here.
Okay. This is uh So, where is engine
next manual?
Okay, it's not running. So, docker PS is
giving you the list of all the
containers
that are actually running. And we have
just created the container. So, this
container does not is not running yet,
okay? If you want to see it amongst this
list, then you need to run the
container. So, you can say
uh docker start and engine next manual.
Like so.
And you'll see this container is now
running, and you can run docker PS, and
here you will see engine next manual
somewhere. Okay.
So, engine next logs, and you can see
engine next manual here.
45 seconds ago.
Right? So, this container is created,
and it's running completely fine. Okay?
You can even
directly like you can combine these two
steps. So, for example, we created the
container first, and then we started the
container. But instead of doing that,
you can simply say docker run, and you
can simply mention engine next.
Uh and you can just say enter. So, this
will directly run the uh container. It
will create the container. It will run
it in one command itself. And here we
have not run it in detached mode. Okay?
So, if you wish to have it in detached
mode, okay, you can have hyphen D over
here.
Hyphen D meaning detached mode, and uh
your
uh console or this terminal won't be
occupied with the logs. Okay? So, if
it's occupied by the logs, say if you
run it this way, and if it's taken uh
over by the logs of the container, then
you cannot run any other command over
here. And if you try to press control C,
it will stop the logs, but it will also
stop the container. You can see it
stopped the container actually. So, your
terminal becomes uh uh gets tied to uh
the container that is running, right?
And that is why you face this issue. So,
so it's best to run it in detached mode
unless and until you have some specific
requirements of uh viewing the logs
continuously. Oh, but to view the logs
continuously, also there are commands
that you can run later on, okay? So, so
I hope this is making sense. You can
even run the container in an interactive
mode, so you can say docker run {hyphen}
IT. So, what this will do is this will
run the container in the interactive
terminal mode, and you can
uh use this if you're testing something.
So, engine X, something like this, and
you can see.
You can even remove a container by its
container ID or container name. So, you
can say docker PS,
and uh you can say docker RM, okay? And
you can mention the container. So, I'm I
can remove this one over here, okay? I
can paste it like so.
Okay, cannot remove the container. So,
you need to stop the container, and
remove it. But, if we if you want to
remove it without stopping it, so you
can force remove with {hyphen} F flag.
And if you press this,
press enter, it will remove it
irrespective of whether the container is
running or stopped, okay? So, that's
force removal. Okay, so this is about
the container uh
like
uh container uh
commands, okay? I'll also show you uh
inspecting and debugging containers. So,
you can say docker PS, okay? You can
view logs of a particular container,
okay? You can say docker logs, and you
can mention the container ID. Now, when
using container ID, you can make use of
any number of characters like three
characters or like more, depending on
your choice. Docker allows you to do
that because it's human-friendly. You
can view the logs, and you can even
mention like tail 10. So, this will only
show you last 10 logs.
Right? So, I'm seeing only 10 logs over
here. Right? So, all these things can be
done. You can even log in to the
container. Okay? You can say
docker exec it
Uh sorry, interactive terminal, which is
it.
And then container name or ID, and then
you can say sh.
Oops. So, this is exec.
I did a spelling mistake. Right? And now
you can run any sort of commands over
here. Right? You can exit like this.
Right? You can do all of this here.
Okay? Now, I'll show you like there are
tons of containers and
uh you know, images out there on our
system. Right? We might want to clean
up. We might want to do a clean up. How
would you do the clean up? Okay? So,
first of all, you can say docker
container prune. So, here you can say
docker container prune. So, what this
will do is this will remove all these
stopped containers.
So, whatever containers have been
stopped, it will remove it.
So, here I have the Docker UI. Okay? So,
here you will see a lot of stopped
containers. You can see a lot of stopped
containers without this uh uh
green uh dot over here. Green dot
meaning they're running.
Right? So, a lot of stopped containers,
and they are consuming memory and uh
storage. What I can say is docker
container prune, and you can see over
here warning, this will remove all
stopped containers. Do you want to
proceed? Yes. So, I'll say y and enter.
And you can see
this has deleted all the containers, and
this is the total space that is saved on
my system. And you can see only running
containers now exist. Okay? You can even
get rid of all the images that are not
being used uh by the containers. So,
here you can see there is one image that
is not being used by any container. So,
what you can do is you can say docker
image prune.
So, this will
ask you for the confirmation. You say
yes. Now, there might be
a scenario wherein you want to remove
all unused images, containers, networks,
and all of that. So, there is Docker
system prune {hyphen} a. So, this will
remove everything. {Hyphen} a will
remove unused images, too. And this will
ask you for a confirmation. I'll say
yes.
And if you say yes, this will get rid of
everything, you know?
So, you can see it's it's got rid of uh
it got rid of uh quite a few things over
here. All stopped containers, networks,
images without at least one container
associated to them. So, it removed
Hello, world as well. Right? It removed
a lot of stuff. Right? So, this is done,
and uh then you have uh a command that
will remove all the containers. Okay, so
I can say Docker RM. And here I can make
use of dollar, and within the bracket
here, I can say Docker PS {hyphen} eq.
Okay? So, Docker PS {hyphen} eq gives
you the uh name of the running
container. So, let me show that to you,
okay? So, I won't run this command, but
I'll say Docker PS {hyphen} eq.
So, if you run this, you'll get the
container IDs of all the containers that
are running. Okay? And these IDs are
then passed into
this command, Docker RM.
Right? So, we are actually combining two
commands over here. So, this is giving
us the ID of all the running containers,
and then we are removing all the running
containers, okay? So, if you run this,
it will
remove Okay.
So, it it's giving us an error. It
cannot remove. So, you can add a
{hyphen} f flag, okay? Because the
containers are running, and they are not
stopped. So, it's telling us that, "Hey,
please stop the container, and then we
can remove it." But I'm not doing that
because my goal was to show you the
command, and not actually remove it. But
that's fine, you get the cracks, okay?
You can add a {hyphen} f flag, and get
it deleted if you wish to. Okay? There
is one more command, okay? I'll tell
you. So, Docker images {hyphen} q.
So, this will give you all the image
IDs, okay? So, if you say docker images
here,
it'll give you all the image IDs. See,
you can see you got all these image IDs
using this command. Right? So, there is
if you want to remove all the images,
you can say docker rmi
and then over here you can mention
dollar
like so.
And here you can say docker images
{hyphen} q like so.
So, you can see
it was trying to remove all the images,
but it could not delete because image is
in use. So, you can make use of {hyphen}
a flag again over here, but I'm not
going to do that. Okay? Uh so, yeah,
these are some of the commands that
exist. Now, there are some commands that
can give you system system information
like docker {hyphen}
version.
Something like this, okay? You can also
get the version using docker version
like so.
Okay, it will give you complete version
of complete information of docker over
here. Okay?
So, with version flag and
without the version flag it is giving
you a lot of information, okay?
Or if you just say docker info,
it is going to give you a lot of
information as well. You can see
tons of information. Right? So, so yeah,
depending on the requirements, so docker
info is giving you system level
information, okay? Depending on the
requirements, you can basically you
know, leverage these commands. All
right? I hope these have been useful and
I hope this has helped you. Now, if you
want to do a big cleanup of your system,
so you can say docker
prune. Oops, docker
prune
system prune, sorry. System prune
{hyphen} a. So, this will remove all the
stopped containers, networks that are
not used, images without associated
containers, and all the built
uh cache. So, there's nothing for me to
clear because all those things are
already deleted, but you can run this to
save a bit on space. I hope this is
useful.
Now, just in case if you want to learn
more,
I do have the list of commands so that
we discussed as well over here. So,
these are all the major related commands
that we spoke about and executed. Okay?
Force remove, build an image, tag an
existing image, all of this. Then you
have a container cycle related commands,
okay? This is very helpful over here.
Okay? And you have container cycle
related commands continued over here.
You can restart, remove, delete, and run
the container like this. A lot of things
you can do.
Then you have inspecting and tagging
containers. These are all commands that
allow you to do that. Okay? You can
basically execute these commands onto
your system and get it done. Okay? These
are debugging related, not tagging
related. I I said tagging accidentally,
okay?
Then you have clean up and removing
everything. So, these are different
commands that allow you to clean up and
remove everything. A few commands are
combination of two over here. Okay?
We've discussed this and then you have
system information related commands. All
right? So, these Keep this list handy.
This will help you a lot.
So, now it's time that we begin talking
about Dockerfile and understand what
Dockerfile is and we'll also take a look
at a sample Dockerfile and understand
different instructions in it. All right?
Now, understand this, okay? What is a
Dockerfile? A Dockerfile is the file
that defines how a Docker image is
created and what all the Docker image
has, okay? Now, you might have an
application and you might want to
containerize it. So, it would need a set
of dependencies. There will be certain
libraries it would work with. So, all of
those things, the right versions and
everything, you define it in a
Dockerfile and then Docker picks that up
and it's creates the image for you using
that file.
Now every Docker image that we talk
about consists of multiple layers,
right? So these are layers that are
stacked one
on one top of each other, right? On top
of each other. So Docker image consists
of multiple layers and how are these
layers formed or how how's it decided
that what should be in a particular
layer? So every layer is one
instruction. So Docker file has a set of
instructions, okay? Uh like some Docker
file might have five, 10, depending on
how complex your application or how
complex image you're building, you might
have certain set of instructions. And
one instruction forms one layer uh in
the Docker image, okay? And this concept
of layers exist because layers get
cached. So if you are changing
something, the image is rebuilt, right?
And if there is no change in that
particular layer, so that same layer is
used and it enhances the speed of image
building. So layers are basically
cached, making builds faster. And if any
early layer changes, so for example in
this stack, if any early layer changes,
for example layer two changes, so
everything after it must be rebuilt.
That is how the system works. If early
layers stays the same and if there is
any changes in layer five over here, for
example, then
the one to four are reused and only five
and six are rebuilt. So this enhances
and increases the speed of
creating Docker images, okay? And this
concept of caching and layering is
essential for performance.
Now what we are going to do is we are
going to take a look at sample Docker
file and we are going to understand some
instructions in it, okay? And this is
going to give you a gist of how a Docker
file is defined, what all the
instructions it have. And before we talk
about instructions, I will mention
Dockerfile does not have any extension.
You just mention Dockerfile, uh D
capital, and
everything after it uh without space in
small Dockerfile. You mention that there
is no extension, and uh that is how the
file is defined, okay? But what does the
file have? So, this is a very simple,
you know, very simple Dockerfile for a
Spring Boot application. Similar files
can be created for Python, Node.js, Go
Lang, any sort of applications. We'll be
taking a look at Dockerfiles for
multiple languages as well, but we need
to start somewhere. So, this is one
example that I'm showing you, okay? And
uh let us discuss about this file. So,
the first line, okay, we'll talk about
line by line, okay, we'll discuss line
by line. So, first line says from
Eclipse Temurin 21 JDK, okay? So, what
this means is
See, whenever you are running your
application in a container, all right,
you would need a runtime environment,
right? So, this is that runtime
environment that my application needs.
So, right now my application is Java,
since we're talking about Java. So, what
I'm doing is I am getting this base
image or with 21 JDK, like JDK version
21. So, that is what my image is
starting with. So, this image already
has uh
a Java 21 installed in it. So, I'm
getting this image, okay? And I'll be
working on this because my application
needs Java 21 to run, okay? There will
be pre-built images for Java version 24,
25, Java 17, Java 8. So, whichever
version you want, you can make use of
the base image for the same, okay? These
base images are available on the Docker
Hub, and they're available publicly free
of charge, okay? So, this is the first
thing wherein we are setting the runtime
for the container. Then, the next thing
is work DIR command. So, first command
was from, and then we have work DIR.
Now, what does work DIR mean? So, this
means create a folder called app inside
the container and we will be working
inside it. Okay? So, all the commands
that will follow after this one, work
DIR, will execute inside {slash} app
folder. So, it's basically setting up a
working directory inside the container
where the rest of the instructions will
be executed. Okay? So, once we set the
work DIR, the next command or the next
instruction we have is copy command. So,
this is going to copy the JAR file,
okay?
So, this Dockerfile will exist in my
project, right? That I want to
containerize. So, what it will do is it
will take a look at target folder and
within that it will pick up the JAR
file, okay? So, this is the source and
this is the target. So, it will pick up
from here
and then it will paste it inside the
container as app.jar.
Okay, so whatever is the JAR name, it
will copy it and paste it inside the
container as app.jar. And where does
this app.jar now reside inside the
container
and within {slash} app directory. Okay?
So, it's copying the JAR file from my
computer to the container and JAR file
is now right now living on target folder
on my local machine because that is how
if you're making use of Maven, it will
be making use of target folder over
here. Okay? And we are renaming it as
well into app.jar over here, right? Now,
once this is done, what we are doing is
once this is copied, we are exposing
port 8080. So, we are saying expose port
8080. Which means that this app
application listens to port 8080 inside
the container. It does not actually
publish the port, okay? It just
documents the intended port, okay? And
that is what we are doing over here in
this particular step. And the next step
we have is the command CMD. So, this is
the default startup command when the
container is started, you know? See,
when the container is started, it has
the JAR file.
Right? When the container is started
from this image, it is going to have the
JAR file. But how to run that JAR file?
So that command you need to provide. So
once the container starts, okay, this
command, whatever is co-
provided using this CMD instruction,
will automatically execute on the
container start. So CMD Java {hyphen}
jar and you're mentioning app.jar. That
is how you're mentioning, okay? And uh
this is what you have mentioned. And uh
once the container starts, this is going
to run and your application will be up
and running, okay? So to summarize, this
Dockerfile simply says that make use of
Java 21, okay, set the working directory
as this one, take the JAR file on my
local machine, copy it to working
directory, expose port 8080, and then
run this command to start my
application. That is what it's uh doing
over here, right? Now uh this file will
basically containerize the current
application and uh it will give you the
output, okay? Now with this, what we
will do is we'll take a look at some
essential Dockerfile instructions. You
have already seen one Dockerfile
example, we went line by line. Let us
take a look at uh another uh another
thing uh of Dockerfile, wherein we'll
talk about some popular instructions
that are used uh a lot, okay? So first
is from.
Okay? So from, what is from? So from is
basically
uh the starting point for your container
and it sets the base image for our
container. So here are some examples of
how from can be used. So you can see
from node 20. So if you want to make use
of node JS version 20, you can set this
from node 10 20. If you are willing to
run a node JS application within the
container. If you're willing to run a
Python application in within the
container, you can say Python
3.10, whatever version you want. If
you're making use of Java, you can use
this uh OpenJDK 17 JDK, right? This is
for Java 17. So depending on your
preference, you can set this, right? The
next uh essential instruction is copy.
So, this is used a lot. Okay, so see
from command from instruction that you
see, this is always the first line of
Dockerfile. Generally, if you take a
look at Dockerfile, from is going to be
the first line of Dockerfile, which sets
the runtime environment for Node.js,
Python, Java, whichever application you
have.
Copy is going to bring your application
into the image. Right? So, there can be
different versions of this command. You
can say copy dot and dot. So, what this
this is going to copy. There's one
version of copy. Copy you can say copy
package.json to the container. This is
another version. Copy app.py to the
other to the container. Okay, or copy
target/app.jar
to app.jar. So, this is something you're
doing for Java. Okay? So, first command
is basically copying everything.
Right? So, copy is basically essential
to bring your app code into the image.
So, these are two instructions. Then we
have more. We have a run. So, what run
does is run is going to basically
execute commands during the image build.
So, this could be like if you want to
install uh
uh install some dependencies, you might
want to, you know, uh so, this is like
you're running the npm install. So,
you're installing Node.js base
dependency. Here you are installing
requirements.txt
Python base dependency. Here you are
basically doing a Maven clean package.
You're repackaging the jar. Right? So,
run basically uh happens during the
build, okay? And uh this is one of the
commands that is used frequently. Then
you have CMD. So, when uh so, CMD tells
what to run when the
container starts. Okay, it defines the
default commands that uh runs when your
container starts. So, these are some
variations of CMD. So, you can This way
you can start a Node.js application.
This way you can start a Python
application. This way you can start a
Java application. These are three
different variations. Okay, and this can
be you can you can use it for running
any command. Okay? But generally you
would run it to start an application.
All right?
So, these are few essential Dockerfile
instructions. I'll also give you a gist
of what Dockerfile will look like for a
Spring Boot application, for a Python
application, or for a Node.js
application. So, here you can see this
is for the Java application. Here you
are setting up the base version as Java
21 JDK. Work directory set. You're
copying the JAR file. You're exposing
port 8080. And then you're running this
command.
Here you are setting this for Python
application. So, you're setting the base
image as Python 3.10 slim version.
Work directory is {slash} app. You're
copying the requirements.txt first. Then
you're installing the dependency within
the image.
Right? You want the
dependencies to be installed. Then
you're copying what is whatever is there
in the current directory to the
container. So, all the source code goes
there. Okay, provided your Dockerfile is
in
your source code directory. Okay?
And then you expose 3000, and then you
run
Python main.py. If you don't want to
copy everything, you can just copy
main.py as well. Okay? But then you can
run this.
Then you have this one Node.js
application. So, you say from Node.js
18.
You set the working directory. Okay? You
copy like everything that starts with
package star.json
to the root directory to the root of the
container over here within app.
Then you say run npm install, and you
pass this production flag.
Okay, you copy all the other source code
that exists in the directory. You expose
port 3000, and then you have this CMD
app.js.
So, these are three definitions which
make use of the instructions that we
discussed.
And these are for different kinds of
apps.
Like Spring Boot app, or Node.js app, or
Python app. I hope this gives you
good clarity and I hope this has given
you
this has helped you, right? Because
Dockerfile is something that you will
see a lot and it's important that you
get used to seeing this kind of code and
understand what every instructions mean
because that will help you a lot.
Just wanted to add this a small video
and mention that down the line we would
be making use a little bit of Visual
Studio Code. Now, why Visual Studio
Code? Because it's easy to use, it's
easy to install and of course if you
have any sort of language specific IDEs,
you can feel free to use them as well.
But I recommend I'm recommending Visual
Studio Code because it's free, easy to
use and if you're developer
then it's very likely that you must have
heard or used Visual Studio Code at some
point in time in your life, right? So,
this is Visual Studio Code over here.
For those who don't know, if you go over
here it is open source and here you can
go to the website and you can get it for
your operating system. The installing
the installation part of Visual Studio
Code is pretty simple.
You know, you you just have to you just
see this download button. You can
download from here. I'm on Windows so
I'm seeing this Windows button
highlighted. If you're on Mac or Linux,
you're going to see the appropriate
button highlighted for your operating
system. You have it for other platforms
as well. You can see over here the
availability. So, get it and install it
onto your system. This is what it's
going to look like and down the line
we are going to work on Dockerfiles,
right? So, we will be containerizing the
application, creating Dockerfiles,
containerizing microservices. So, you're
going to learn all of that and Visual
Studio Code just fits in everywhere. But
if you prefer making use of IntelliJ or
PyCharm or any sort of IDE that is
specific to the work you do or if you
have any other preference, feel free to
use that. But my recommendation would be
Visual Studio Code where you can even
add extensions. So, for example,
here I have one of the repositories open
over here. Okay? Here you have an option
of adding extension. So, if you're
working on Docker, you can basically add
a Docker-related extension. And it adds
a little bit of Docker-related features.
So, this is the official you can see
48.6 million downloads it has. And very
good star rating. So, I use this often,
but I've uninstalled it for a while so
that I can demonstrate this in the
course. So, I won't install this plugin.
I have this plugin usually and I use
Docker a lot. So, this gives you the
extension pack for Docker Visual Studio
Code, like Docker extension pack. And
you can make use of Docker files and
manage all the Docker-related code
easily over here. Okay? So, that's the
leverage with Visual Studio Code with
IntelliJ and other IDEs also, I'm sure
there will be plugins or extensions that
you can make use of. Okay? But But yeah,
I wanted to just add this short lecture
wherein I just give you a gist of how
you can make use of Visual Studio Code.
Now, Visual Studio Code I'm explaining
over here because
we are going to containerize
applications. We're going to learn how
to containerize applications in
different programming languages like
Node.js, Python. We're also going to
take a look at Spring Boot, right? So,
of course, if you if you're keen to
learn all of them, of course, you can
learn your language only, like Node.js
only. I'm I'm a Node.js developer.
You'll be like, I'm a Node.js developer.
I want to just see how I can
containerize Node.js. So, that's fine.
You can just
skip to those lectures that cover
Node.js because I have labeling done
clearly.
If you Python is also covered. So, I
I'll have a simple Python REST API which
I'll show you
how you can containerize and a
microservices as well. So, it will give
you some additional knowledge and even
Spring Boot, of course. So, here
Spring Boot is not mentioned, but Spring
Boot, of course. But what I mean to say
over here is Visual Studio Code. If
you're installing Visual Studio Code, it
It with all the programming languages,
right? You can code in Python, you can
code in JavaScript, which is Node.js,
you can code in Spring Boot. It supports
everything and it has good extension for
Docker as well and it's free to use. So,
that is why I'm recommending Visual
Studio Code.
And I feel as a developer you should not
get stick to one IDE. You should always
have that corner in behind you which
says, "Okay, I'm fine. Let's try out
this IDE or let's try out that IDE."
Which is absolutely okay. Tomorrow if
you want to experiment with some other
IDE, so you should be free to do that
and you should have that mindset as
well. Okay? So, so yeah, like I said,
we'll be learning how to containerize
different kinds of like applications
written in different programming
languages. So, we'll containerize a
simple language sorry, simple app
written in all three language like
Node.js, Python, we'll cover Spring Boot
as well.
And down the line we'll also learn how
you can containerize a microservice.
Right? A microservice written in three,
four languages like Node.js, Python,
Spring Boot, Java. Okay? So, so yeah,
ready to start?
All right. So, now is the time that we
begin exploring the GitHub repository
for this particular course. So, you will
find the link to the repository
in the description of this video or in
the resources section. So, I believe you
should check out the resources section.
Or if you don't want to check out this
is what the repository link will be. If
I update this repository, then you will
see it in the resources. Updated link
should be there. Okay? And also, this is
the official repository. It's a public
repository. You don't need any sort of
access to access this. And here you can
see you have one folder over here as of
now. Okay? So,
I'm working on this and as you progress
through the course, you will see many
more folders if needed will be added
over here and you can check check out
that as well. Okay? So, what I will do
is I will just clone the current stage
of the repository onto my local machine,
okay? And right now I'll get only one
folder because right now as I'm cloning
this uh the repository has only one
folder, but down the line you might see
more folders. So, feel free to check out
everything.
Okay, but we will only be talking about
this Docker folder right now because it
has uh the source code that we need to
proceed with further, all right? So,
what I'm going to do is I'm going to
come over here. I'm going to copy the uh
repository URL.
And uh I'll come over here.
And uh here you can switch over to a
folder on your local machine. So, create
a folder on your local machine which
serves as a workspace for this
particular course and whatever work you
are doing for this course resides in
that folder. That will help you keep you
organized, right? And then while the
terminal, so right now where I am, so I
am in this directory. So, feel free to
navigate to this directory over here.
Okay? So, what I will do is I'll just
copy this link and I'll say CD
and I'll paste this, okay?
So, now if you see I'm in this directory
and if you do LS there is nothing here,
okay? I'll just clear this out. And then
I'll once again copy this URL.
And uh here I'll come. I'll say git
clone and I'll paste this URL. Okay? So,
this entire repository is being cloned
on my local machine and if I see enter
okay, so you will see entire thing being
cloned, all right? And you'll see it
over here.
And uh I'll just navigate to Docker and
okay,
CD
and if you see okay, DevOps Masterclass
and then if you see you have a Docker
over here, okay? So, this created and
now within Docker you will see couple of
applications over here.
Okay? You have this application one
which is a simple hello uh
it's a simple application which just
says hello, and then you have app two
tax calculator, which is app two. And
this is a microservice based project. So
here, if you go to spring, so this
microservice is written in three
languages over here. So you have the
language for spring, which is spring
boot. There are two microservices.
Python also has two microservices, and
node js also has two microservices,
okay? But if you come back over here,
app one is what we're going to talk
about. So here, there's a spring boot
folder, which has hello spring over
here. And then you have python folder,
which has these two files over here. And
then you have node js folder, which has
these two files, okay?
Now, this is what the repository has as
of now, okay? And app one hello,
this folder is what is going to be the
focus
for few lectures down the line, all
right? And we will talk about
dockerizing or containerizing
the project. So this is actually the
project source code for a hello world
application. So it just displays hello
world. And the code is already written,
okay? What you can do is you can open
this entire folder in Visual Studio
Code, so that you can you know, get a
sense of it. So I'll just open Visual
Studio Code over here.
So I have a Visual Studio Code open over
here, all right? And I've not opened the
project yet. But what I'm going to do is
I'm going to click on this open folder.
If you don't see open folder, you can
get it from file and open folder over
here, okay? But just say open folder and
just navigate to the folder
where we just cloned the source code.
So I've just navigated to this folder,
and I'll just select DevOps Master
Class, and I'll say select folder. Now,
this is going to open everything for me,
okay? So I'll just close everything. And
here, you are going to This gives a
better view of the entire project, okay?
So you have this docker folder right
now. Now, of course, like I mentioned
earlier on, okay? Right now, I'm seeing
this docker folder. Uh down the line,
you might see so when you see this
repository after I'm finished recording
this entire course, you will see many
more folders over here, right? So, just
click on this Docker. You go to app one,
okay? And here you have this node,
Python, and Spring Boot, okay? So, these
are the This application is what we are
going to focus on, app one hello. And
this has a hello world application
written in three different languages.
So, this has a Node.js code, okay? It
has Python code, and a Spring Boot code,
like a Spring Boot project. Okay, it has
the all three. And uh this is what we
are going to talk. And here we have app
two, which is tax calculator, and this
is a microservice based uh project,
where in you have two services written
in three different programming language.
The services are same, the functionality
is same, but they're written in three
different programming language, like
Node, Python, and Spring, all right? And
uh we'll be talking about how you can
containerize this down the line, and how
you can create Docker image out of it uh
for the all three programming languages.
This is going to help uh everyone, okay?
Even if you're coming from a different
dev background, or even if you're Java
dev today, and if you happen to work on
Python tomorrow, or Node.js tomorrow, so
this knowledge is going to help you. I
hope uh you are able to follow along so
far.
So, now is the time that we will begin
containerize our Python application. So,
in the repository that you have opened,
just head over to the app one hello, and
you will see this Python folder. Now,
within this Python folder, you will see
this main.py application, okay? So, this
is the Python file. It's a very simple
application which just says which just
gives this as an output in the JSON
form, okay? So, it says uh this is a
message, okay? And this message is
coming in from Python Flask based app.
We're making use of Flask.
Uh this is the ENV variable, and then
you have container over here, like so
the host name, basically, right?
And uh this triggers the app to run.
This is the this is sort of main method
that uh that is making sure the app runs
on localhost and is exposed on port
3000. And then here at the top you will
see in we are initializing this and then
we are initializing ENV and host name.
So here we are getting the host name.
Host name which means the container name
wherein the application is running.
And we are getting this ENV variable
that is being set, right? And this
method basically this is a method which
is hello method which is responsible for
returning the data in the JSON format
which is displayed at the this
particular endpoint and it is being
mapped to a get request. So it's a very
simple source code. Hardly I would say
like not even 20 lines of source code,
okay?
Including all the new lines new line
character, okay? And it's pretty simple
like here we did do the initialization
for Flask and all. We initialize the app
then here we get couple of variables
which is the ENV variable and the host
name, right? And this is the method that
is mapped to a get request on the root
URL. And then we are simply returning
the JSON message over here. Whatever we
want to message in the JSON form. So
message key and the message, ENV key and
the ENV container key and the host name.
And then we have the main method over
here, right? So it's it's pretty simple.
This is the Python application then we
have requirements.txt.
Now requirements.txt
will have the list of all the
dependencies basically that your
application needs to function. So right
now this application just needs Flask.
All right? Now what we are going to do
is we are going to containerize this
application which means this one and
this is the second which is
requirement.txt file. Right? If you're
coming from a Python background you will
know that requirement.txt is used to
have all the dependencies listed. And if
you create virtual environments and all
it becomes easy to install all the
dependencies at once. So you have the
list ready, right?
Now what we are going to do is we are to
create a Dockerfile. So, here in the
Python directory, I'm going to add a new
file and I'm going to call this as a
Dockerfile, something like this. Okay?
And uh the moment you create a
Dockerfile, if you're making use of
Visual Studio Code, you will see this
suggestion, of course. And uh you'll see
the suggestion in other IDEs as well.
For example, IntelliJ gives this
suggestion on creating a Dockerfile,
whether you want to create add this
Docker plugin.
Right? So, generally, a lot of IDEs do
this. And I'm getting this recommended
container tools extension for from
Microsoft for Docker language. I can say
install. And uh this is an extension
that helps us uh work with Docker
related code easily. So, you can see
Dockerfile is highlighted this way.
>> [snorts]
>> Right? You can build the image by
right-clicking on it. It has a lot of
things that you can do. You can see all
the images and everything. So, it makes
your life easy. You can see everything
in this GIF, what you can do, all the
containers that are running. All right?
So,
it's it's great, I would say. And that
is being installed over here. And if you
come here now, so you will see this
Dockerfile has this icon now. Right? So,
Dockerfile has this icon. And now here,
uh you can uh like start uh So, here you
can see it's giving me an option to
generate the code or select a language.
Right? So, I'm I'm simply going to type
in the code over here. Okay? So, the
first thing I'm going to do is I'm going
to specify
from and I'm going to have the base
image. Okay, now what is the base image
name? So, I'm going to make use of an
image that has Python in it. So, 3.10
and slim version. Okay?
So, this is one of the images that I'm
using. Okay? Now, if you wish to see
more about this image, what am I using,
so you can go to Docker Hub over here
and search for this image here.
Okay?
So, this is the image that I'm uh making
use of over here.
Okay? So, this is this is the official
image coming in from Python. Okay? You
can play around and explore whichever
image you wish to use. All right? But,
yeah. This is the image that I'm using.
So, it'll have Python pre-installed.
Okay? I'll specify work DIR, which will
be {slash} app. Okay? So, within the
container, this will be the work working
directory. Then, I'm going to say copy.
And I'm going to have
I'm I'm going to copy requirements. dot
txt to the current directory. So, to the
current directory within the container,
which is which means like the current
directory in the container we have set
to {slash} app. So, I'll just set this
to dot. Okay? So, requirements.txt in
the current directory where I'm writing
this Dockerfile will get copied to the
current directory which we have set
within the container, which is {slash}
app within the container, right? I'm
going to say run. And I'm going to say
pip install. I'm going to say no cache
uh and DIR {hyphen} R. And I'm going to
say requirements.txt.
Okay? So, what are we doing over here?
We are running this command where in we
are saying pip install no cache
directory. Uh sorry, no cache directory
just ensures that uh none of the caches
are considered. {hyphen} R and then
requirements.txt.
So, this is done. And then, what I'm
going to have is I'm going to say copy.
And I'm going to copy
everything else. Okay? Uh from the
current directory to that of current
directory in the e docker container. And
after doing this, I'm going to say
expose port 3000. And then, I'm going to
end this with a command. Okay? So, I
want to run this application. So, I'm
going to say Python and then main.py.
Something like this.
Okay? So, this is done. And this is what
our Dockerfile looks like. Now, here if
you see this dot over here, the white
dot, it means the file is not saved. So,
just say control S and the file will get
saved over here. All right? Now, this is
done and yeah, uh we have our uh
Docker file set. Now, we were getting
some suggestions over here when we as I
was typing in the code like CMD was
coming in the suggestion, expose was
coming in. There is syntax highlighting.
So, all of this is because of the
extension that uh basically we have
installed over here.
Right? Now, once this this is done, what
I will do is uh I will head over to my
terminal. Okay, you can make use of
terminal or you can uh make use of
terminal inbuilt within Visual Studio
Code. But, I'll just use an external
terminal because I've been using it that
way since a while. Right? So, I'll just
say PWD and I'll just relocate to folder
called Docker
and uh app one, hello, and then Python.
So, I'll just navigate to where my
Docker file is.
So, my Docker file is over here. I'll
just do LS. You can see main.py, Docker
file. You can see everything over here.
Right? Now, what I will do is I'll say
Docker build
and I will say hyphen t.
And then, what you will have to do is
you will have to mention the image name
over here and you will have to mention
the dot. Okay? So, dot meaning basically
uh it has the Docker file in the current
directory. So, it will build the image
from the current directory. But, here
you need to specify the image name. Now,
what image name should we specify? So,
I'm going to say over here hello.
Okay, hello.
And then, Python. Now, one more thing
you have to do is uh this is the image
name. Of course, this image will be
built locally. But, if you want to push
this image onto a Docker registry like
Docker Hub, you will have to prepend
this with your username. Right? And for
that, you will need an account on Docker
Hub. So, it's a free account uh and if
you have it, it's good. But, I already
have a free account on Docker Hub and uh
my personal personal username for this
particular course that I've created is
decode 007.
Okay, so this is mine temporary
temporary username for demonstration
purpose and I'll be pushing it to this
particular
account over here. So this is a
account that is created by me. You can
create your own account by going to
hub.docker.com. Just make a note of the
username and just come over here. Okay,
and just paste that over here and just
put forward slash. Now why are we doing
this? Why are we prepending it with the
username? Because you know that is how
that is how
Docker Hub organizes or may or have the
image
pushed to Docker Hub. You know, so if
you want to push it to Docker Hub, you
have to include the username because
only then it will know where the image
or which account the image is supposed
to be pushed. Okay, and before doing
that you also have to make sure that you
log in. Okay, so I'm not sure if I'm
logged in, but I'll just press enter.
Okay, let us see what happens. So the
image is being built.
Image is being built. Okay, so for
building the image you don't need to be
logged in. Okay, because you're just
building it locally, right? And you will
see all the steps basically over here.
Okay, I'm sorry about that. I said you
have to log in before doing this step,
but that's not the case. I I missed one
thing. You have to build the image. The
image will be built. So you're just
building the image. You're not pushing
it yet. The image has been built
locally. So you can take a look at all
the steps over here as to what is
happening now. Now this output that
you're seeing has a lot of learnings in
it. Okay, so I'm I'm going to spend some
time on this. You know, this is going to
give you a lot of understanding about
how Docker images are created and how
Docker
works in a nutshell. Okay, so so see
this first command that we gave we
mentioned you build. Okay, then we said
hyphen t over here and we mentioned the
name of the image that we wish to have.
Okay, because this is the image where we
this is the command where we are
building the image and we mentioned dot
over here. Why did we mention dot? Dot
mentioned dot we mentioned because we
wanted to tell
Docker that you need to make use of
current folder as the build context.
Right? So, since we are running this
particular command in a particular
folder, and that particular folder, I'm
sorry, that particular folder has a
Dockerfile in it. Okay? This is a
Dockerfile. So, it will make use of the
current folder as the build context, and
it will take a look at the code, the
Dockerfile, and all the source code, and
then it will build the image from
whatever is there in this particular
folder. So, it is using this particular
folder as this build context. That is
what we have mentioned. This is the
image name, and this is the command
Docker build {hyphen} t. Okay? This is
done. So, it started the image building
process. Now, if you take a look at the
image building process, you will realize
that whatever you had mentioned in the
file has been taken into consideration.
File meaning Dockerfile. Okay? So, you
can see over here, first it loaded the
build definition from the Dockerfile.
So, it picked up the Docker file. Okay?
Then transferred the Dockerfile, then it
loaded the metadata for this particular
base image. It pulled this base image.
Okay? It It got Docker ignore and all of
that. And then it started from step one
of five. Now, why one of five? Because
here if you see, uh you have like all
the instructions, right? So, it is going
step by step. Right? And what it did is
here you can see, it it it resolved a
Python. This is the base image. It
extracted everything.
Then it set this work directory over
here. Then this is the third layer
wherein it got the requirements.txt.
Then it got this installation run. Then
it copied everything. Okay? And then
finally it exported everything to the
image. Okay? And it got the image
created over here. Okay? So, this is the
image that has been created. And if you
if you type in Docker images over here,
okay? You should see the image. So, you
can see this image here. Right? You can
see the image. Decode hello Python
and colon latest. Now, here one thing
you will assume one thing you will
notice that here the tag that has
appeared is the latest tag. Why does it
appear as a latest tag? Because we did
not specify any sort of tag. Right? When
we run the command did we specify any
tag? So, tag can be specified after this
over here by with the help of a colon.
So, I'll I'll just give you an example.
So, here you can mention the tag like
this. Like V1, something like this. We
did not mention the tag. So, by default
the tag that was assumed that was
assumed to be of latest over here. Okay?
And we mentioned this So, the image that
is being created is being tagged with
this name.
Right? Hyphen T meaning
we are tagging it. Right? Now, in order
to once we are done with this, image is
created. Right? If you go to the
interface over here like Docker Desktop,
you will see this image is being
created. Right? You can click on the
image and you can see all the layers,
everything what happened. You can see
layers over here. So, these are all the
layers. Right? So, you can see there are
there are like few things over here.
Python version was added as a fifth
layer.
Then you can see this CMD work directory
was set. So, a lot of commands you will
see are coming in from Docker file that
we defined. requirements.txt,
you copied this, exposed this. CMD
python main.py. All of this basically is
what you are seeing from from the Docker
file. Right? Now, in order to run this,
what we will have to do is we'll have to
make use of the Docker run command. So,
I'm going to say Docker run hyphen D
because I'm running it in detach mode.
I'll name my container. I'll say py-app
and I'll do a port mapping. So, I'll map
this to 3000 port on my local machine
inside the container. Because, you know,
inside the container it is running on
port 3000. So, inside the container port
3000 should be mapped to port 3000 on my
local machine. And then I'll say decode
uh 007
uh slash hello
hyphen python, something like this,
okay? Now, the moment you say this, you
can say enter over here, and you can see
the application is up and running.
Right? And uh you'll see uh if you go
over here, you'll see the screen dot
appear, which means there's a container
that is making use of this application
or this image, and you can see this
application running.
And you can check this application by
heading over to
localhost colon 3000.
Right? And you can zoom in a bit, okay?
So, this is the output that you get,
okay? There is no ENV set because there
there was no environment variable set.
Container ID is this, and uh this is the
message from the application. This is
the exact container ID
that we have got over here. Right? This
is what we have got.
Right? So, this application is uh up and
running. Now, what we can do is
uh we can even get this application or
this image pushed to the Docker
registry, okay? And for that, you'll
have to say Docker login first, so
you'll have to log in uh on the terminal
using your Docker Hub username. So, just
say Docker login, and you will be
prompted for username and password in
the browser. So, just finish that
authentication and return, it will take
you back to the terminal, and it'll
authenticate the session on the
terminal. Because, you know, you cannot
just randomly push to any account. You
have to like authenticate yourself on
the command line, and that tells the
Docker that you are the owner of that
particular account. So, I'll just say
Docker login, and I'll just get myself
authenticated.
So, you can see over here, uh it I
already had logged in with Docker in on
the terminal in past. So, it uh it is
saying authenticating with the existing
credentials, and it authenticated
myself. You can see over here.
Right? And you can see uh it says Docker
I info.
Uh Uh, so, [snorts]
so yeah, here it's printing the
username. So, I'm indeed authenticated
with the right account. I have multiple
Docker Hub accounts, you know, for
demonstration purposes. But yeah, this
is done. Now, what I can do is I can say
docker uh, I can say push over here,
something like this. Okay, and I can
mention decode uh, okay, sorry. Decode
py-app,
like so. Okay, the moment you say this
Okay.
Uh, okay. Uh, using the default tag
latest and this tag does not exist. Is
that so?
Okay, let me see. Decode 007
hello-python. Okay, I'm sorry. I
mentioned the image name as correct. Uh,
incorrect. I mentioned the image name as
incorrect. This is the image name.
Decode 007 hello-python. py-app is the
name of the container. Right? So, don't
get confused. py-app is the name of the
container and this is the name of the
image. Okay, so just come over here and
uh, you can say over here hello-python.
Hello.
Oops, hello.
Python, something like this. And just
say
enter, like so. And you can see
uh, it's actually pushing the image to
the remote uh, repository. And I'll wait
for a while, it'll take a bit. Uh, it'll
take some time because it'll make use of
the internet and it says it's pushed.
So, we'll go to my Docker Hub account
and here you can see last push was 5
months ago.
Let me refresh this. Do we see a new
app coming in? So, you can see this is a
new application that has been pushed
here. Can you see this? Hello-python.
And if you click on this, this is the
image that we have pushed. And one of
the tags that exist is latest. Why
latest? Because we have not specified
any tag when building the image. So,
latest is the default one. Right? If you
click on this, you're going to see the
image details, everything that you were
seeing on the Docker Desktop app and its
size, everything, everything is visible
over here. And it's also running on our
local machine.
Right? And this can be pulled and run on
any machine which has Docker. I hope
this has been useful and I hope you have
a good gist of uh you know
how uh you can uh work with Docker and
how you can uh you know create and build
and push your own images for your Python
application. Now, one thing I'll tell
you uh you cannot uh One One question
normally people have, can you push if my
application or my image name is not
pre-tagged or not tagged with this
username?
So, right now it is username/image name.
Right? That is the syntax we have
followed. So, can I push my image? So,
the answer is no. Okay? Uh it will be uh
denied. Okay? Also, you have to make
sure that you're logged in to the
terminal logged in to the terminal to
push the image to the remote repository.
Okay? And also, you won't be able to
push if you do have uh you do not have
access to the repository. Okay? So, if
you're working in teams, you have to
make sure that you have access to the
repositories. I hope this has been
useful and you all have been able to
follow along.
All right. So, now it's time that we
begin talking about Node.js application.
So, what we are going to do is uh
you will have this
DevOps Masterclass
uh source code over here. Like you have
you must have cloned it on your local
machine.
Just go under Docker and just go under
app one node and uh just open node. So,
under node you will see like two files.
This is a source code for a simple
Node.js-based application which exposes
a REST endpoint and that says hello
world. Okay? So, I'll I'll just take you
through.
If you open package.json, uh you will
know like this is the dependencies file.
So, just in case if you're not well
versed with Node.js, I'll just give you
a gist that this is the file that keeps
track of all the dependencies and app
information. So, here the dependency
that I'm using is Express JS over here
that you can see. See and here you can
see this is the version of Express JS
that I'm using. Okay, there is a latest
version available. So, probably
you know, this can be upgraded to the
latest version. But I believe I'll stick
to this one because this is the stable
one. Okay, if you want you can change
the version numbers. But the goal is to
learn how you can you know,
containerize a Docker
Docker image from for a Node.js
application. So, how you we can
containerize a Node.js application. So,
this is the package.json. Okay, we are
making use of Express JS. This is a web
framework which can help us create a
a REST API. So, what I've done is here
we have this app.js. Okay, it's a simple
file. I'll keep this to the point. Okay.
So, here at the top you are seeing you
know,
some constants. Here you have this a
get endpoint being defined over here.
You can see this get endpoint being
defined request response. And here this
is returning this is just returning a
JSON based response which has three
things, message key,
ENV key and container key. So, this
message is just displaying the message.
ENV is just displaying the environment
variable. And if this is not set the
environment variable value, then we just
have this message no ENV set. Okay. This
is the port that is being set. So, the
port is not being used here, but it's
being used later. And here we are
displaying the container name.
So, this container name is coming over
here like so. Okay. And these are some
initializations for Express JS. So, we
are initializing Express JS.
We are initializing few variables over
here like port, ENV and host name. And
then we have this REST endpoint coming
in over here.
And then we are basically running the
app over here on this particular port.
Right? And this is how it's running. So,
it's very simple
like hardly around 15 lines of code,
okay? A very simple REST API, uh, and
it's just exposing one endpoint, okay?
Now, once this is done, what we need to
do is we need to containerize this
application, all right? So, what I will
do is I'll come over here
and I will create a new file. Now, I
just have two files over here within
this particular, uh, folder, so I'll
just create a new file, and this file
will be the Dockerfile. Now, make sure
you you have exact this,
uh, casing over here, Dockerfile, where
D is capital and everything else is
small, no extension. I'll just press
enter.
Now, the moment I press enter, you will
see this icon come in over here,
right? That, uh, so, Visual Studio Code
identifies
that this is a Dockerfile.
Now, this is because I have an extension
installed over here already, okay? And
this extension is for Docker. So, if you
search for Docker over here in the
extension section, you'll see that, uh,
okay, I don't see.
Okay, it's giving me an option to
install,
uh, but I had installed this, so one
second, let me see this. Probably there
is some problem. Let me refresh.
Or I'll clear this out and let me see
what all is installed. Okay, Container
Tool is installed over here, Container
Tool. So, not Docker, but Container
Tools is installed. And, uh, this is,
uh, this is basically helping me work
with Dockerfiles, okay? So, this is
installed, and if you don't have it
installed, you will be prompted to
install this, so be sure to install
this, or you can install it, or you can
even do without it. Okay, it's not like,
uh, it's not going to work, but it just
helps, you know?
Uh, and if you're making any, uh, if
you're making use of any other IDE like
IntelliJ or, uh, any other IDE of your
choice, almost every IDE has plugin for
Docker these days, so feel free to
install them, right? Now, what we are
going to do is we are going to define a
Dockerfile, and this Dockerfile is, uh,
going to have the recipe for image
creation, okay? So, first thing is I'm
going to have a base image mentioned
over here. You can see the suggestion,
base image. So, we need to mention the
base image. For this, we'll come over
here to Docker Hub.
And you can search for Node.
I'll get the base image for Node.js over
here. Okay? So, you can see there are
tons of images. So, if you scroll down,
okay, this is the official image of
Node.js on Docker Hub. Okay? So, you can
search for Node, come on this page, and
you can see tons of versions over here.
Now, you might see a different version
altogether, depending on when you're
watching this video. Okay? But, I'm
showing you how you can pick the right
version. So, what you can do is after
coming over here, you can pick any of
the latest slim version. So, here you
can see somewhere you will see version
25 slim. So, can you see this 25 slim?
This one? You can make use of this, or
you can make use of 24 slim. So, here
you should have 24 slim as well. You can
see this 24 slim. Okay. Let me select
this. Let me see if I can select this
one. 24 slim. Right? So, I'll click on
this. I'll make use of this 24 slim.
Okay, it it opened the GitHub page. I
don't want to go to GitHub page, of
course. So, I'll just mention 24-slim.
Right? So, node:24-slim.
So, I'll come over here and I'll say
node:24
-slim. Something like this.
Okay? So, this is something I'll add.
Okay? So, it is going to take this
number slim.
Because slim basically is
it's basically a slimmer version. All
right? The size is slimmer. Okay? And
it's it's
it works best for simple Node.js based
application. And 24 is anyways the LTS
version, so I'll prefer that. Okay?
Rather than going for the latest
version, which might have some issues.
Okay? So, I've not tried Node.js latest
version, so that is why I'm going for
with one. So, this is the first thing.
okay? You can feel free to change the
latest versions depending on when you're
watching this video, there will be
latest versions available. So, you can
feel free to update this. But, this is
done, okay? We have the base image set.
Now, what I'm going to do is I'm going
to set the work DIR. And here, I'm going
to set the work DIR to {slash} app
folder.
So, this will be set, right? And you can
see how I'm getting auto suggestions for
the Docker instructions that I'm adding.
And this is all because of the extension
that I've added. So, you can see copy
and you can see I'm getting a
suggestion. Copy. So, now here you'll
write source and destination. So, what
you want to copy from the source and
destination.
So, I'll say I need to copy package over
here. Package.
p a c k a g e package star.json.
So, any sort of package JSON
uh
file, okay? Which starts with package
will be copied to destination. And what
is the destination? Destination is
is the container, okay? So, it will copy
that. And after copy, we will make use
of run over here. And we'll say npm
install.
And I'll say production. Okay? So, this
will only install the dependencies and
it will skip the dev dependencies
because of the production flag enabled.
Okay, so we are basically installing all
the dependencies. Now, where is this
dependency installed from? It is
installed from package.json, right? And
package.json is already copied. So, you
have to copy the package.json first. And
even before copying, you have to set the
work directory first, okay? So, work
directory is going to set the working
directory, right? And if this folder
does not exist within the container,
like Docker is going to create it.
It'll copy this and then it will run
this command inside the container.
Right? And then we need to add one more
command. We'll say copy. And I'll say
dot. So, everything in the current
directory
to the container's current directory,
right? So, rest of the files, apart from
package.json, is also copied into the
container. So, that is what we are
mentioning over here now. And then, I'll
say expose port 3000 because our app is
going to run on 3000, as you can see
from the source code over here.
Port is 3000, right?
And uh then,
I'm going to have a command executed.
So, this is a default command that will
be executed when the container starts.
So, I'm going to say uh node. And to run
Node.js applications, we need to add
space and then app.js.
So, this is usually passed in uh JSON
array, this CMD. Whatever command you
want to pass in will be passed in JSON
array. And uh this this is how it's
passed, okay? So, node space app.js. So,
node will be one parameter and app.js
will be other parameter. And then, I'll
save this Dockerfile.
Now, once this is done, okay? What we
will do is we'll come over here.
And uh you have to make sure that you
have an account on Docker Hub. Okay? So,
I do have a account on Docker Hub. It's
a free account. I'll encourage you to
sign up over here. And uh you can see my
username is decode007. So, this is a
dummy account that I've created for
demonstration purposes. Okay? So, what
I'm going to do is I'm going to make use
of this account. So, I'm going to come
over here.
Right? And uh let us make use of this.
So, I'm going to build the image, right?
So, first of all, I have to make sure
like I'm in the right directory.
Okay? Am I in the right directory?
Uh absolutely not. So, maybe I need to
say PWD.
Okay? LS. Okay, PWD.
Now, I'm in Docker. So, I'm going to say
app1 hello and then node over here.
Okay? Now, I'm in the right directory,
clear? So, I have to be in the node
folder. And then, I'm going to say
docker build
-t.
And I have to mention my username
{slash} image name
and then
I have to mention dot. Dot stands for
the current directory. So, what this
command is going to do is
we are telling Docker to build a Docker
image
and tag it with this name. Okay, and use
the current directory as the build
context. I repeat, we are telling Docker
to build a Docker image using this
command, Docker build,
and tag it {hyphen} t with this
uh this name.
And we are using current directory as
the build context, okay? Now, in name,
why have I added {slash} over here in
between and why the name is like this,
okay? I'll tell you that as well.
Because we want to push this to Docker
Hub.
Right? So, the syntax is here you should
have your username, which is decode007.
This is my Docker Hub username and here
I should have the name of the image. So,
I'll say hello-node over here. So,
decode007 {slash} hello-node. Why?
Because this is a convention. If you
don't specify your username {slash}
image name, so if username is not added
to the tag or the image name, then uh
while pushing uh it will not accept on
Docker registry or Docker Hub. Okay, so
this is mandatory. You need to
uh name your or tag your image this way
and you need to mention the current
folder as the build context. Okay, it
has all the source code and the Docker
file.
Now, we'll say enter.
The moment you say enter, there will be
a lot of processing that will happen. It
is going to pull the base image. It is
going to you can see node:24-slim.
It is pulling this base image. It is
loading everything, doing a lot of
stuff. And all the steps that you've
mentioned in the uh Dockerfile, it is
following that step and it has built the
image. Okay, let us go through all the
steps over here. So, here you can see
first it loaded the
uh build definition from Dockerfile,
okay? Then it transferred the Dockerfile
somewhere and then it loaded the
metadata for node Uh this is a base
image node 24 slim, right? Then it uh
loaded dot docker ignore.
Now there's no docker ignore file that
we've created, but similar to get
ignore, we have docker ignore. So if you
want to ignore certain files to be
considered by Docker, you can create a
dot ignore docker ignore file, okay?
Then it started with first step. Now
first step meaning here
there are like steps 1 2 3 4 and 5. This
is the step that will be executed when
the container runs. So these are the
five steps, okay? So first thing is it
will pull the image, right? It has
extracted the image. Then it set the
working directory.
Then it copied the package.json and then
it did npm install and then it copied
uh this rest of the source code. So
until here is basically five steps 1 2 3
uh 1 2 3 4 5, right? And these two steps
are left over here, right? So this is
done and then it exported to image
exported all the layers. So all these
steps became layers over here. You can
see. Then it exported all the layers and
exported con-
config everything and now it is unpacked
this into an image. You can see. And if
you say docker
images, you're going to see this image
being created over here,
right? And you can see the size of the
image and everything and you can even
see it over here. You can see hello node
latest. If you click on this,
you will see the layers over here,
right? And some of the instructions that
we have written in Dockerfile have
turned into layer. For example, this is
a this is a layer. You can see this is a
layer. This is an instruction from
Dockerfile. This is a layer.
This is a layer. This is a layer. This
is a layer. So what will happen is if
you're changing any instruction, only
that layer and after layers after that
will be rebuilt. Okay, so the image
building process will be faster. That's
the benefit of the layering technology.
So, this is done. Now, what we need to
do is we need to run the image. Okay, so
I'm going to say docker run
hyphen D for the dash mode and hyphen
name, I'll mention the name as hello
node over here.
And I'm going to map this port to
uh 3000 on my local machine to that of
3000 within the container because within
the container our application is running
over here. And I'll say decode
007/hellonode.
So, this is my image name. Okay, I'll
say enter.
And you can see
the container is running and you can
access the application as well now. So,
you can come over here, you can say
localhost:
3000
like so.
And you will see
message
ENV and container.
Okay, this is coming in from simple app
and this is the same container that we
just ran. You can see.
All right. So, the container is running.
Now, how do we get this image from our
local machine to that of Docker Hub? So,
for doing that, we the process is fairly
simple. Okay, we are going to like say
uh docker push
docker push
and uh decode 007/
hello-node
like so. Okay. The moment you do this,
you can see this is pushing to the
repository
and you can see this is pushed.
This is pushed.
And uh
you can see it is taking a while but
this will be pushed and uh once this is
complete, okay? Uh so, it's pushed and
you can see
Okay, this is done. So, you got the
latest digest SHA-256
and this This done. Now, if you come
over here
Okay, if you to your Docker Hub account,
if you refresh this, you're going to see
hello node appear, and it's pushed less
than a minute ago.
Right? And you can click on this, and
you can see a lot of information like
what tags exist. Now, the default tag
that exists over here is latest tag
because we did not mention any tag.
Okay? So, one thing I'll tell you, if
you want to add your own tag, you can
mention it like while tagging the image,
while building the image, you can
mention it over here with the help of
colon. But, we did not mention that, so
it by default considered it as latest
because that is the default one. If you
click on this,
okay, here you will see the image
layers.
Right? Something like this.
So, this is done, right? And the image
is also pushed. And if you want, you can
even check the logs and everything
for the image. Uh okay, so you have the
image name, uh sorry, container name and
everything. So, you can check the log,
follow the logs, and all of that. All
right? I hope uh you have a complete
picture of how you can containerize and
build images of your Node.js
application, and I hope this has been
super useful.
So, now is the time that we are going to
take a look at how you can containerize
a Spring Boot application. Okay? I do
have Visual Studio Code also installed.
Uh I'm of course going to also make use
of IntelliJ because a lot of you prefer
IntelliJ. I know a lot of Java devs, but
I also have Visual Studio Code also
installed where I have checked out the
code, and here under app hello one, I
have Spring Boot code as well. Okay?
But, let me open this project in
IntelliJ as well. So, I'm going to say
open over here and navigate to the
project directory.
So, I've navigated to the project
directory, and I'll open the Spring Boot
folder. So, under app one hello, I'll go
to Spring Boot. Hello Spring is my
project, and I'll select pom.xml.
Okay? And I'll open this as a project,
and I'll say trust project over here.
Okay? These are just some security
features from IntelliJ.
Okay, so it's open here as well in
IntelliJ.
And okay, build scripts found. So, load
the Maven project. So, it is suggesting
that this is a Maven project. Do you
want me to load it as a Maven project?
So, I'll say yes. Okay. So, it's now
being recognized as a Maven project over
here as you can see.
All right. And uh yeah, this is it. This
you can also do in Visual Studio Code.
Okay, but usually Java devs prefer using
IntelliJ. So, I'm just giving you all
the IntelliJ experience. But whatever
I'm doing over here, showcasing over
here can be done
in uh Visual Studio Code as well. Okay.
Now, first thing over here is I'm going
to add a Dockerfile. Now, what is a
Dockerfile? Dockerfile is a file that is
going to help us define our image.
Right? It's going to have the recipe for
image creation. So, I'll say right
click, new. And here I'll say uh you can
see I have this option for Dockerfile.
Okay. Or you can just simply create a
new file over here. Okay, sorry.
So, you can create a new file.
And you can call it Dockerfile if you
don't see the option for creating a
Dockerfile directly, right?
And uh this is done. Uh so, Dockerfile
is created. Now, for me, it's coming
with this Docker icon.
Right? This wheel icon, Docker.
Uh but if you're not seeing this, what
you can do is I would recommend you
should install an extension or a plugin.
So, you should go to settings over here.
And under settings, you will have this
plugins option. So, here I have this
Docker plugin installed. So, you can
search for Docker, switch to
marketplace, and search for Docker over
here.
And you will see this Docker plugin.
So, this enables uh you to work with
Docker in a very easy way. And uh
basically, it reduces a lot of effort,
you know. So, things like you'll see uh
like create a new Dockerfile and all all
those options. Okay, whenever you are
working in the project. All right? So,
this is done. and the same thing you can
do in Visual Studio Code also. Here also
you can create a new file. Okay, and
Visual Studio Code also has an option to
add uh
Docker related setup. So, the plugin is
called the one I have installed over
here is container
Okay, what is it called? Container
tools.
Right? So, container tools help you Uh
so, here you can see Docker icon up here
against the file name. Right? And if I
type in, I'll get auto suggest as well.
Okay? But I'm making use of IntelliJ,
okay? Just because everybody prefers
IntelliJ. But Visual Studio Code is also
fine. Whatever I'm doing over here can
be done in Visual Studio Code, too.
Right? So, come over here.
And uh here I'm going to write some
instructions. Now, first thing is I'm
going to have the base image pulled. So,
I'm going to say from Okay, Eclipse
Uh you can see the suggestions Temurin,
okay? And I'm going to say Uh Eclipse
Temurin is the name of the base image
and I'm going to say 21 hyphen JDK.
Like so. Okay? Now, if you want to know
what is the Eclipse Temurin, so you can
see I got some suggestions. You can even
select Alpine over here.
This is another version, but I'm just
selecting 21 JDK. If you want to see
what Eclipse Temurin is, so just come
over to Docker Hub and search for
Eclipse Temurin.
Okay? So, you can see over here official
images of OpenJDK binaries. So, you want
a
base image which has JDK.
Okay? And uh if you scroll down, you'll
see like Eclipse Temurin 21. There there
are tons of tags. You can like play
around with this and just explore the
tags, whatever tags they have.
All right? So, I'm making use of one of
the tags, okay? Over here.
And uh then I'm going to set the working
directory. So, I'm going to say work
directory should be set as app within
the container. So, within the container
/app directory will be created if it
does not exist and it will be set as the
working directory. So, whatever we are
doing afterwards and then with respect
to the container will be done in this
directory. All right, so this is my way
of organizing things.
Now, what I'm going to say is I'm going
to say copy
and I'm go going to copy the JAR file,
okay? So, I'm going to say target
{slash}
{star}.jar.
So, whichever JAR file we have over here
in the target folder, just copy it as
app.jar to the container.
Right? So, this is the source and this
is the destination. Right? So, source
and the destination. This is done.
And then I'm going to say expose
port 8080.
Okay? And then I'm going to run a
command over here. And command will be
in the form of arrays over here with the
CMD
uh CMD instruction. I'm going to say
Java.
{comma}
uh the option is hyphen jar and then
{comma}
and the option is app.jar because that
is the name of the JAR file. Okay?
So, that's the uh thing over here. All
right? Now, this is the file, okay?
Simply, we are getting the base image,
setting the working directory, copying
the JAR file, exposing the port, and
running the command to start the JAR
file within the container.
Okay?
Now, one thing I'll mention
we don't have this target folder yet.
So, if you see over here, we don't have
target folder.
Right? Do we? We don't. So, if you
create an image with this, it's going to
fail.
So, we need to have target folder. Now,
what is the target folder? Target
folder, when it comes to Spring Boot
projects or Java projects, is a folder
for the build output. So, that is the
folder where JAR files and everything is
created. So, what I'm going to do is I'm
going to open the terminal.
Okay? You can even do this in uh Visual
Studio Code.
So, in Visual Studio Code, you have an
option to
basically open a terminal here. Right?
So, you can open the terminal here, too.
Right? I'm going to open the terminal
here and I'm going to make sure I'm in
the uh Spring Boot directory. So, I'm in
the project directory.
Right? If you do LS, you can see all
these files. I'll clear.
Now here, I am going to build the entire
project. So, you can build the project
using the command line. What you can do
is you can run the project from here.
Run the entire file from here. So, you
can just go to the main
uh code over here and you can run it.
Okay?
We'll do that. Okay, so uh instead of
running, I'll just run the command.
Okay? So, if you're on Mac or Linux, you
have to run it this way. You have to say
M V N W
clean
package and hyphen
D
skip tests. Something like this. Okay,
this is the command that you need to
run. Now this is for
Mac. Okay? What What are we doing? We
are making use of Maven wrapper over
here. So, we are building the entire
project using Maven and we are making
use of Maven wrapper. Now with Spring
Boot project, you get Maven wrapper over
here.
Right? So, we are using that. But if you
are on
Windows, okay? If you are on Windows,
you need to run something like this.
MVNW.cmd.
Okay? Something like this. Let me run
this. Let me see if this runs.
Okay, something some problem over here.
What's the problem?
It gave me this error, so let me try
this again. So, I'll come over here.
And dot and backward slash is what I'll
try. Okay, I did some research and I got
to know like this would work. Okay, so
it worked. You can see MVN.cmd.
Okay?
So So, yeah. If you are on Windows, so
I'll just reiterate. Okay, let me clear
this out. Okay? Let me clear this out.
Clear?
If you are on Windows, so it has to be
it has to be
forward slash over here and MVNW. Okay?
Something like this.
This is how it'll run on Mac. Okay? But
if you're on Windows, it has to be like
this. Okay? Backward slash. So, this is
how it works on Windows. And once you
run this you would have seen so if I if
I run this again
you will see okay
the entire project is built. Okay, if
you don't want to run the command what
you can do is you can come over here and
run this main
file. Okay, that will also produce the
target folder. So, you can see target
folder is here now. Within target folder
you will get a jar file.
Right? So, if you run this it should
produce a target folder or you can
rebuild the project. Okay, rebuild the
project.
So, that can produce or I would
recommend running it via command. Okay,
that is the best thing you can do.
Right? So, once you have the target
folder you will have jar file inside.
Okay, and this jar file is what now will
be copied into the docker image. So,
this is sorted. Right? This image
creation won't fail.
Also, let us let me take you through the
entire source code over here as well.
Okay, so here you can see you have this
project.
Here within main
So, first of all if you go to pom.xml
it's a very simple project over here.
Okay, it's making use of Java 21. Very
simple web project over here. Right? And
here if you go to hello controller
Okay, so this is controller. Very simple
controller.
It is giving access it is returning this
thing over here. It's returning message
ENV and the host name. Right? And we are
getting the host name from here and ENV
we are getting from here. Environment
variables. And this is being mapped as
get mapping and rest controller. Right?
So, this is very simple controller which
is just returning this data over here.
Very simple. No
nothing else over here. It's it's very
simple to the point.
Right? So, this is done. Now, what we'll
do is we'll make use of a power shell.
So, I'll switch over to power shell
because that is what I've been using and
I'll make sure like I'm in the right
directory. Okay, so I'll I'm in docker.
I'll say app one hello and then I'll
switch to spring boot like so, okay? So,
I'm in spring boot directory and I'll
switch over to hello spring like so.
Okay. Okay, so now I'm in the right
directory here.
So, this is done. What I need to do now
is I need to build the image and before
building the image what I need is I need
an account on Docker Hub.
So, here this is what I need, okay?
I have
an account already created on Docker
Hub, so you can see decode007 is my
username. Now, why do we need this?
Because later on
because now when we create the image we
need to tag the image with the username
so that later on we can push it to our
Docker Hub account, right? So, I'll come
over here.
Okay, here on terminal and you have
everything in this directory. So, you
have Dockerfile and all the source code
as well.
Okay, so I'll clear out everything and
I'll just take this forward, okay? And
here I'm going to say I'm going to run
this command Docker build. So, this is a
command to build a Docker image.
I'm going to say hyphen t because I want
to tag it and the syntax is here you
will mention the username and the tag
name
followed by a slash.
You can even mention the Sorry, this is
the image name, okay? I'm tagging it
with the image name. So, this is a
username.
This part is the
image name and after colon I have to
mention the tag. So, tag is the version
basically and then I'll have a dot.
Dot meaning the current directory.
So, this parameter basically tells
a Docker build command as to which
directory should be used for the build
context. Build context meaning which
directory has the source code, the
Docker build file and everything that is
needed for Docker to build the image.
So, it's the current directory because
we have navigated to that directory,
right? If we have not then we have to
mention the path. Right? Now, we need to
fill these placeholders. So, here I I'll
have my username, decode
007.
Here, I'll have the image name, which is
hello.
And I'll say spring like so.
And I won't mention the tag right now.
You can mention the tag if you wish to.
But if you don't mention the tag, the
default one is latest. Okay, you should
know this by now. Right? And I'll press
this. I'll press enter over here.
Okay, now you'll see the build process
has begun. Okay? And it will take a bit
uh depending on your internet connection
speed and everything, but the image will
be created. So, you can see.
Okay? So, let us
start from
uh the top. We have Docker build
command. We are saying tag this by
username {slash} the image name.
And use current directory as the build
context. Now, it took total 6.2 seconds
and it started with a lot of things. So,
it first loaded the Dockerfile.
It uh started working on this Eclipse
Temurin image.
It pulled that. It loaded Dockerignore.
Now, Dockerignore is a file like
Gitignore. In GitHub, you have
Gitignore, which allows you to ignore
certain files from the repository or
from the version control. So,
Dockerignore in the similar way, there
is a file that you can define to ignore
some files that you don't want to be
considered by Docker. So, if you have
any sensitive files, you can make use of
Dockerignore. Right? This can help you
reduce image size.
Then, it started with first step. So,
you can see there are a few steps. First
step, second step, and third step. And
these steps are decided from the
instructions that we have given in the
Dockerfile.
Right? So, this is the first step.
This is the second step.
And then, this is the third step. These
two steps are not considered right now
because they will come into play when
the container is started.
Right? So, here if you come, first step
is it will pull the Eclipse Temurin
image. Right? Second step is it will set
the working directory.
Third step is it will
uh copy the JAR file into the image.
Okay? And then, it will export the
image, export the layers, and it will
save the image locally onto your system
using this name.
You can see.
Right? It's naming this and it is
unpacking over here. So, this entire
process finishes and you have everything
along with the time the process or the
step took. Okay? And you have the image
ready. Now, keep in mind whatever
instructions you are defining that are
uh that form one layer. One instruction
is one layer. Okay? And you can see that
clearly over here.
Right? So, this is done. You have the
image and now you can run this command
docker images over here.
You should be able to see this image
over here which is created. See?
Along with the size and every all the
details. Okay?
And uh then uh we can run the image as
well. Okay? You can see the image here
also in the UI. Like you can see this
docker.
So, this is this is the this is the
images tab and you can see the image. If
you click on this, you can see the
layers as well. There are 20 layers.
Right? And you can see these commands
where a few layers in the end. You can
see.
The this is coming in from our uh
docker file.
So, if you make any sort of changes in
the instructions later on, let's say you
add a couple of instructions or you
modify the command to start the
application, you add certain flags. So,
only those layers
only that layer will be modified and all
the layers afterwards will be modified.
Okay? That will be done. So, this is
done. All right. And uh now over here
uh what I will do is I'll run the
application. So, I'll say docker run.
Okay? And uh basically to run the
application, I'll have to make use I'll
have to make use of port mapping and
all. So, I'll say {hyphen} d
and {hyphen} name first of all I name
the container. I'll say hello
and I'll say spring.
And uh I'll mention the port mapping.
I'll say {hyphen} p and I'll map it to
8080 port on my local machine and I'll
map it to the container.
And I'll mention the code
uh 007.
Uh sorry. So, the name of the image is
okay, decode 007. That's the correct
username and I have slash hello world,
something like this.
Okay, so this is something we need to
mention. I think this is it.
Let me run this.
Okay, unable to find the image. One
second. One second. I'm sorry. So, it
it's not hello world. I mentioned the
incorrect name. It's hello spring. I'm
sorry about that.
Decode 007 hello spring.
Okay, so now you can see
uh the container is started. And now if
you go to localhost
colon
8080, you're going to see the output
from the spring application. You can see
spring boot. And this is a container.
2AEE555.
So, you will see 2AEE555
over here.
Like so.
Right? So, container is running and you
can like uh check the logs also. Docker
logs and uh then
2 AEE555,
like so. You can see the entire logs
over here.
Okay, is the actual container that you
have created from the image, okay? Now,
the next thing after creating an image
is you want to push this image to Docker
Hub. How would you do that? So, you can
say Docker
push
and you can mention the code
007 slash hello
spring.
Like so.
Okay?
And press enter.
So, you can see it's pushing the image
to the remote
uh repository. You can see this is the
remote repository, okay? Now, before
pushing, you also will have to log in,
okay? I I forgot to mention one step. If
if
you will also have to log in over here.
Okay, so you will have to say docker
login. Okay, and I'm already
authenticated. So, it's not asking me
for any sort of credentials, but
generally if you are not logged in, so
before pushing it will ask you for
authentication and you will have to
login.
And it will open in the browser, you
will have to authenticate, enter your
username password, and then you will be
uh redirected to the terminal. Okay? And
only then you can push this.
Okay, only then you can push this. So,
remember that and keep that in mind
because, you know, it's your account.
How will you push it from your terminal?
Right? So, you need to give access uh to
the terminal to your account, right? And
you have to you can do it with this this
uh command, docker login.
Okay? So, you need to do this and once
you're done, basically you should be
able to push this. I'm already
authenticated, so it worked with me.
Okay, because I I work on docker a lot,
so I'm already authenticated. Right? So,
this worked and it's pushed the image.
Now, you can come over here and you can
see pushing also happened in layers, you
can see.
Right? If you come over here to your
docker hub and if you refresh, you're
going to see hello spring up here over
here, 1 minute ago it was pushed. If you
click on this,
you're going to see the latest tag over
here. Did we mention the tag?
Not really. So, how did latest come over
here? Simple.
If you don't mention the tag, by default
it's considered as latest. Now, if you
want a specific tag, you need to tag
your image explicitly by mentioning it
when creating the image. So, when you
were creating the image,
you can mention it over here, colon and
V1, something like that. Okay? So, it
will be considered. Right?
So, this is done. And if you click on
this latest,
you're going to see all the layers that
you could see on docker desktop as well.
Right? And anyone in the world is a
public image, right? So, anyone in the
world can pull this and use it. You can
see
uh you should see somewhere. So, this is
a public view. This is public
repository. Right?
Uh okay.
So, public is not mentioned anywhere,
but this is a public repository, I'm
pretty sure.
Okay, let me go to repositories. Okay,
so you can see visibility is public.
Right? So, you need to be uh sure of
whatever you're pushing, right? Uh so,
yeah, this is how you can
create Docker images for a Spring Boot
application. This is how you can
containerize it, and this is how you can
make sure that it's pushed to the remote
uh Docker registry. Now, one question
that beginners often ask me is do you
need to mention the image name in this
way, like
uh your username {slash} the image name?
Why can't I just use image name?
So, the answer to this is this is a
convention, and this is compulsory
mandatory, wherein you need to have
Docker Hub username appended before the
image in this format,
if you wish to push the image to the
remote Docker Hub registry. If you don't
mention your username, it's going to
fail.
Right? So, you need to mention that. So,
I hope this clears out, and I hope this
has been useful.
So, I also wanted to mention that this
particular course is a part of
full-fledged course that is available
here on Udemy, and you can get the
discounts coupon for this particular
course here on our website, the link for
which you will find in the description
below. Don't go directly and buy the
course, but you should claim the
discount coupon for being a viewer of
our channel. So, you will find a
discount coupon below. Uh you'll find
the link, and just head over to this
website, if you click on enroll now, you
will get the latest coupon applied, the
link with the latest coupon applied. So,
just click over here, and this link will
take you to Udemy with the best coupon
available at that particular point in
time. Now, talking about the course,
this course is right now the best seller
in its category, and as I'm recording
the video, it has just launched, okay?
And it is part of Udemy for Business
subscription as well. So, Udemy courses,
you you like you can get it for uh very
uh low price. We believe in affordable
education and yes,
this course is around roughly 40 hours.
Okay, I'm adding more and more content
every now and then. So, people who are
enrolled into this particular course,
thank you very much for the trust and
you all know like how I'm updating the
content like right? So,
there is new releases happening every
now and then. So, this length increases
with latest industry trends and
technologies, whatever is happening in
the world. I keep on updating the
courses and right now you can see this
course stands strong with roughly 40
hours. It's so it's totally it's total
40 hours right now in length. It's
massive. It deserves a lot of or it
demands a lot of commitment from you,
but it delivers the skill and this is
something that you can get from the
ratings and the best seller tag that it
has. Now, remember
being a best seller in this niche on a
platform like Udemy is not a joke. Okay,
there are so many courses that are
competing for this spot, but good
content always finds the way. Okay, so
just head over to this website and this
website is embarkings.com. Also, I'll
talk a little bit more about this
course. So, here you can see this is the
course. So, by the way, from the title
you will see full stack AI DevOps
Masterclass. So, why are we calling this
course as full stack course? Because in
this particular course, we learn how to
deploy full stack applications, right?
We we learn how to do DevOps on full
stack application. Full stack meaning
front end as well as back end. We don't
build the application, but we learn how
to perform DevOps, right? Then, AI.
I've not added AI as a marketing tactic
over here. Okay, because every other
course you see they add AI in the
headline, but that's not the case here.
You learn AI driven DevOps as well, AI
assisted DevOps as well. You learn how
to make use of DevOps to
you learn how to
make use of AI to improve on your DevOps
workflow. So, that is also covered. So,
that is why AI comes over here. DevOps,
of course, because it's a DevOps course.
Real projects because we give you access
to some real projects. So, we give
access to monolith application and also
microservices. I'll talk about that.
Microservice access is also given. You
get a ready-made application, a
full-stack application built in
microservices architecture. And you can
do like everything like deployment,
containerization, Kubernetes deployment,
you know, deploying it to cloud. So, all
of that you learn how you can manage
configurations. All of that is covered.
And yes, this is the first course, I
would say, that covers all the three
major technologies. Sorry, major cloud
platforms, I would say. AWS, Azure, and
GCP. These three in combination in a
single course are rare, okay? At least I
have not seen.
And uh yeah, at an unbelievable price.
So,
we had to keep this on Udemy, okay?
Because we believe in affordable
education and trust me, the price at
which you get this course for, this
course delivers far more than that,
okay? I can promise this to you, okay?
So, so you can go and check the reviews
as well and you can check the
curriculum. But, what all we cover over
here? So, we understood the title, why
why we have this kind of title over
here, okay? We have microservices as
well over here. Okay? So, first this
course starts with DevOps mindset. Then,
we head over to Docker.
So, we containerize the application and
when we talk about containerization, we
just don't containerize monolith
application. We containerize
microservices and then we learn how to
go full-stack. Okay? Then, we learn
about Kubernetes, okay? And we learn how
to make use of Kubernetes and deploy
your application to Kubernetes. So,
monolith, microservice, and full-stack
again, okay? And also, I'll tell you,
okay, looking at these keywords, I I
know a lot of beginners will get
overwhelmed, but don't worry if you've
never heard of Docker, for example, if
you've never heard of DevOps, you don't
know what DevOps is, then this course is
still for you. So, I forgot to mention
one thing, this course is for absolute
beginners. Okay? In fact, it is targeted
towards developers
and also DevOps engineers who are
breaking into this field. So, I
literally start So, look at the first
lecture that you see over here. Okay?
You
You learn first what is DevOps.
What is DevOps? That is where we start,
okay? And then we start with Docker.
Okay, so if you've never heard of these
terms, don't worry about them, okay? You
just uh enroll and just uh start taking
lectures in a daily manner, and you will
learn all these terminologies. So, I was
talking about Kubernetes. If you've
never heard of Kubernetes, we have that
covered inside the course. You
After the course completes, you will not
only learn what is Kubernetes, but you
will also know how you can deploy and
manage applications on Kubernetes, what
are pods. You will understand If you're
a developer, see, if you're a developer,
what major challenge is today?
Developers can't interact uh with DevOps
engineers. They can interact, but they
don't understand the terminologies that
they're using. So, this course equips
you with that, okay? You learn that
terminologies, you understand the
terminologies, and you can communicate
with DevOps engineers with ease, okay?
So, so that's something there. You So,
first we set up Kubernetes locally, and
then we take Kubernetes to the cloud.
Okay, so you learn how to deploy
applications in cloud on Kubernetes
infrastructure. And we cover all three
cloud providers over here, like GCP,
AWS, and Azure, okay? And yes, we also
cover infrastructure as code. So, IAC
means infrastructure as code. So, this
is covered using Terraform. So, see,
infrastructure provisioning is a part,
okay? And um
you know, these days infrastructure can
be provisioned with the help of code.
And how it is provisioned, that is
something really, really important that
you need to understand. So, all of that
is covered in a hands-on manner. See, I
deliver courses that are hands-on. Okay,
I believe in learning hands-on. I don't
believe in theoretical and, you know,
mugged up learning. I don't believe in
that. And that is
what my courses also reflect. Okay, so
if you take a look at all the learners,
okay, or if you take some sort of
feedback from all the learners who have
graduated from my courses, you will know
that courses delivered by us, EmbarkX,
okay,
these courses are hands-on. We talk
about real things. We build real things.
So, that's that's what we deliver on.
And yes, Udemy as a platform is awesome.
Okay, we have the courses hosted there
and you can you can come over here on
embarkx.com. You'll find all these links
in the description below, by the way.
Okay. So, you have we have this
uh Spring Boot roadmap, uh sorry, Spring
Boot uh course over here, which is the
flagship course available on Udemy.
Okay. And then we have a microservices
course, okay. This is also a flagship
course hosted on Udemy. These are all
best sellers and they're best sellers
for a reason, okay. And uh so so that's
there and if you
if you wish to know the roadmap, okay,
or if you're not sure as a beginner or
in which order you should take our
courses in, so you can go to
embarkx.com,
okay, and you can say {slash} roadmap
over here. So, you will get access to
this roadmap and it will give you a
complete understanding, okay, you should
enroll if. So, it it will give you
complete understanding of which course
you should you should take when.
Okay, so it starts with this full stack
professional e-commerce masterclass.
It's a full stack course that teaches
you how to build professional e-commerce
grade applications using Spring Boot. We
cover React, JavaScript, everything
inside the course. Everything is
covered. You just need to know Java,
object-oriented programming, basic
knowledge of Java. you just come inside
the course and we take you through.
Right? Spring Boot microservices is the
next, okay, which I just spoke about,
and then full stack DevOps uh for
software engineers. So, this is the
course. So, yeah, I hope uh you all will
leverage the coupon code, the lowest
price coupon code that I'm sharing on
the website. The link for the same is in
the description below. Feel free to
take a look at the discount and then
decide. A lot of people are uh a lot of
people have already enrolled, and the
feedback has been tremendous, okay? This
can help you take your career to the
next level, okay? All the best.
All right. So, now it's time that we
begin talking about Kubernetes and
understand why something like this
exists today.
And uh the goal is by the end of this
video, you are going to have a complete
picture and understanding of Kubernetes
and why everybody is using it. So,
first, let's talk about Docker. So, we
are already aware of the problem that
Docker solved, right? So, Docker solved
this problem of uh developers saying,
"Hey, it works on my machine." Right?
So, whenever you are sharing your
application with someone, an executable
or source code, okay? The thing is it's
it's not going to work on their machine
because it's not going to match your
environment. So, Docker came in and it
solved the problem by packaging the
application along with its dependencies
into something called as containers. And
with Docker, you could uh build images,
run containers, exposed ports, exposed
ports, and uh make use of Docker Compose
as well, right? But, Docker alone is
going to break in the production. Docker
alone is not enough in production. Of
course, Docker is needed. We need to
containerize our application, but we
need more to make sure that our
application functions smoothly in
production. And to introduce uh that
problem, what problem it is uh that
Docker is not able to solve, let me give
you a scenario. So, let's say you have a
application, okay? Imagine the scenario.
Okay, this is like a real scenario.
You're going to have multiple services.
So, here I have Node.js service, Spring
Boot service, Python service, and even
the front-end service, okay?
These are the services that are running
in the production. Now, what happens if
Now, there are some questions. What
happens if a container crashes at 2:00
a.m.? Right? This can, of course,
happen. Traffic suddenly jumps 10x.
Okay, what what will happen in that
case? You need five more instances of a
particular service. So, let's say
service A is Node.js, and you would need
one five more instances of this
particular service, right? One container
runs on another VM, okay? So, how how
would that work? Right? So, if you have
multiple containers, and if you have
multiple VMs as well, and one container
is running on another VM, you're going
to deploy
and you deploy a new version, okay? And
you don't want any sort of downtime. So,
how are you going to
manage this? And Docker
is a platform that helps you
containerize the application. Now, for
all these problems, Docker does not have
a solution. So, there is no answer for
this if you're making use of just Docker
and nothing else, right? And this
problem that you're seeing over here,
that is
listed on the left-hand side, is called
as container orchestration problem.
Okay? Container orchestration problem.
And uh I'm I'm sure like many people uh
watching this won't be aware of what
orchestration is, and that is why I
think we should spend some time on
orchestration. See, this is going to
take a little bit of time. I'm going to
have some examples as well, but the
knowledge that you gain over here is
going to be long-term. You don't need to
revisit these concepts ever in your
life, okay? So, just be patient. What is
orchestration? So, orchestration is
means automatically managing many
containers across multiple machines. And
when you say managing, it includes
running, scaling, networking, and even
healing them. Healing means if a
container crashes, you have to make sure
that you restart the container. So, that
is called healing, okay? So, Docker will
run one container.
Docker as a platform will run container,
right? But orchestration will manage
multiple containers together, okay? And
uh to explain this even more, I do have
an example of a kitchen, okay? Of a
restaurant kitchen, you can say. So, so
restaurant kitchen is going to have
chefs, right? And it's going to have
orders as well over here.
Now, what would happen if a chef leaves
or stops working?
Right? There has to be someone who is
assigning orders to the chef, right?
There can be multiple chefs as well in
the restaurant, right? Let's say there
are 10 chefs, and there there are orders
that are coming in.
So, who is assigning orders to which
chef? And let's say if five chefs leave
or they are not feeling well or they are
not there or they switch jobs, okay? How
how would you bring in replacement? Who
brings in replacement, right? So, there
is a need for a manager who assigns chef
automatically to the orders, and they
could be
they should also be a way wherein the
manager makes sure that there are more
chefs added during rush hours. For
example, if morning and evenings are the
rush hours, you have to make sure that
there are additional chefs that are
being added. You also need to replace
sick chefs instantly, right? And you
need to make sure that dishes that are
being prepared by chefs go to the right
right table, right? So, there is a need
for a kitchen manager, right? And a
kitchen manager comes in, and he's going
to do the job of managing the chefs and
making sure that the orders are
delivered in a right way to the
customer. So, kitchen manager over here
is the orchestrator.
Okay, he's doing the job of managing
coordinating workers so work continues
smoothly even when things go wrong. And
this process is known as orchestration.
Okay, I hope this is making sense. And
when you map these things to technology,
chefs over here are like container. The
dishes that you're seeing over here,
dishes meaning orders that you're
getting, is nothing but request or
traffic.
And kitchen manager over here is the
orchestrator over here, right? And it is
doing the job like this. So basically it
is doing the job of managing and
coordinating workers so that the work
continues smoothly even when things go
wrong.
Okay? And this is what the container
orchestration problem is. So I've
summarized this problem over here. The
problem is if a container crashes, who
restarts it? Docker is not automatically
going to restart it. It is a platform to
help you make containers and run it,
right? It is not going to restart start
it and manage them for you, right? Of
course, see, you can make use of Docker
Compose to start and stop multiple
containers. But if a container crashes,
Docker Compose is not going to restart
it, right? Scaling. How do you scale How
do you run 10 copies of a same service?
So let's say if there is a order service
and you are running an e-commerce
platform. There is a order service. And
let's say there is a big billion sale or
let's say there is a Black Friday sale.
Some big sale is happening. Instantly on
the sale day you would need 10 copies of
the order instance because there are
going to be a lot of orders flowing in
and you don't want the customer
experience to hamper. So you would need
10 instance, more power in the order
service. So that is called scaling. Load
balancing. If there are multiple
instances, you know, the instances So
let's say if there are 10 instances
running for order service. Now how are
you going to make sure that the request
is evenly distributed amongst all the
instances? That is called load
balancing, right? Service discovery. So
let's say there are two services, A and
B.
And of course, for the outside world,
they are like a single unit, right? So,
how they are going to communicate with
each other, right? So, that is that also
needs to be taken care of. Zero downtime
deploy. So, generally, when you deploy a
new version of the application, there is
a downtime, okay? Because the new
version will take over the old version.
So, you need to make sure if if you're
running a very
uh you know uh if if your app requires a
high level of up uptime, basically, and
if there is a sale going on and you're
fixing some bugs in the production, you
have to make sure that there is zero
downtime. How are you going to manage
that? Multi-machine setup, right? So,
Docker works in one machine, okay? Uh or
one machine at a time. So, how are you
going to manage multi-machine setup?
Right? Health checks. How to detect
broken containers. So, all these things
are the problems of uh
container orchestration, and these are
the problems that can occur when you're
just making use of uh Docker, right? And
in production, okay? This is not how
things are going to work because you
need to manage containers at scale, and
that is where Kubernetes comes into
play. So, all of this
uh all of these are the problems without
Kubernetes. So, what is Kubernetes?
Kubernetes is a container orchestration
problem. Uh sorry, container
orchestration platform, not problem. I'm
sorry about that. That manages
containers for you at scale, okay? And
it does a job of automating deployment,
scaling, networking, and managing the
containerized application. So, yes. So,
see this. Applications are already
containerized using Docker, okay? You
have created containers, but you need to
manage multiple instances, you need to
manage all these containers. So, for
that, you need Kubernetes, right? So,
let's say the example that I gave, you
need to scale your order service
instantly because there is a lot of
traffic coming in for order service. So,
you're going to have a scaling strategy
in place for order service within
Kubernetes. And Kubernetes is going to
make sure that it has right number of
instances up and running at any given
point in time, right? And it would
like it has to have those many
instances. That problem is taken care by
Kubernetes. Okay? So, that is what
Kubernetes is for you. Now, let us talk
about Docker and Kubernetes. So, there
is a lot of confusion whenever beginners
learn about Kubernetes or hear for the
first time, they get confused as to what
is the difference between Kubernetes and
Docker? So, here I have head-to-head
definition. Sorry, not head-to-head
definition, head-to-head differences
between Docker and Kubernetes. So,
Docker runs the container.
But Kubernetes is going to manage them
for you, right?
Docker is single host focus. Kubernetes
is multi-node cluster focus. So, there
are multiple clusters that are running
when you run Kubernetes and it can
manage all those multiple clusters. But
Docker is single host focus. Docker has
manual scaling, but Kubernetes has auto
scaling, right? Docker, if something
fails, you need a manual restart.
But with Kubernetes, it's going to be
self-healing. So, if something has
failed, it's going to automatically
restart that container. That's the power
of Kubernetes, right? And auto scaling,
if I have to talk about auto scaling,
you can have things defined that at this
particular
point in time, I want to auto scale
these these services. So, it'll auto
scale and you can even scale down.
All these things are possible. When it
comes to Docker, there is manual
networking, but in Kubernetes, there is
built-in service discovery, right? So,
so that's the that's the difference
between Kubernetes and Docker.
Now,
Docker is the engine and Kubernetes is
basically the autopilot over here, okay?
Now, let us take a look at scenario as
to what how things would work without
Kubernetes. So, without Kubernetes, if
Node.js service crashes over here in
this architecture, we have front end,
Node JS, Spring Boot, Python. So, there
are multiple services running. Okay,
this is the service running in Node JS.
This is service running in Spring Boot.
And this is service running in Python.
So, if you're running a microservices
architecture, it's normal to have uh
different services making use of
different programming languages and
frameworks. Okay? Uh just in case if you
have that question. Now, Node JS service
crashes, okay, and the app breaks. So,
what is going to happen? So, if you if
there is no Kubernetes, okay, operations
team will wake up. They're going to uh
connect to the server using SSH, and
they're going to restart the container.
Now, this is very manual, right? Someone
is manually Okay, app crashed. So, there
will be some notification that will be
sent to the operations team. They'll uh
log in
via SSH, and they'll restart the
container. This is very manual. And if
operations teams is not available or the
notifications was not sent properly, uh
even if they were available and if the
notifications were sent properly, there
is going to be some delay because it
will take some time for operations team
to connect and restart the container.
So, there will be a little bit of town
time in your application even in the
best case. This is not the right way of
doing things. But, if you're making use
of Kubernetes, okay, let's say we uh
migrate to Kubernetes, then
Kubernetes itself will detect the crash.
It will restart the container and
maintain the desired count. Example I've
given over here, three replicas. So,
when you define the Kubernetes
configuration for your application, you
have uh something called as replicas
that you can define. And that is what
it's talking over here about. Okay, so
you define replicas, and the number of
replicas you define, Kubernetes will
make sure that it matches the defined
state. So, if you have defined three
replicas, I want three replicas of,
let's say, the service that is running
using Node JS. It is going to make sure
that there are three instances running
at all given point in time. It is going
to route the traffic to healthy pods
only. Pods meaning uh the containers run
in pod in of Kubernetes. Okay? So, it is
going to route the traffic only to
healthy containers, and it is going to
scale up and scale down based on the
load. Okay? There is no human
intervention needed over here. It's It's
that amazing. Okay? So, I hope you are
getting a gist of the power of
Kubernetes and the actual problem it
solves. Generally, people are not aware.
See, they start using Kubernetes.
Oh, Kubernetes is uh the hype these
days. Let's use Kubernetes. But, why are
you using Kubernetes? What problem does
it solve? These are all very important
things that you need to understand from
a long-term developer perspective and
even from an interview perspective. Your
interviewer, uh he might uh ask you or
cross-question you on these all
concepts. So, it's really important that
you spend some time and get crystal
clear as to why Docker won't work in
production. Why See, Docker will work.
You need Docker. You cannot say no to
Docker. You need uh a platform to
containerize your applications. That is
important. Right? But, just Docker won't
work. You need something that manages
all the containers at scale. And that is
where Kubernetes comes in. So,
Kubernetes plus Docker is the strategy
over here. Right?
Now, let's talk about some of the key
problems that uh Kubernetes is going to
solve. The number one problem is
self-healing. Okay? So, container is of
course going to crash in production.
Okay? This is a normal scenario. There
will be bugs. Now, Kubernetes will come
in over here. It'll restart it
automatically. And if there is a node
that dies, okay, the the pod will move
to another node. Okay? So, there is a
concept of node and pods in Kubernetes.
It is going to make sure So, basically,
Kubernetes over here maintains high
availability. That is the point that I'm
trying to communicate over here. Right?
Scaling. Okay? So, if there is a traffic
spike, of course, which they will be,
okay, if you're running a If If you're
building a tech application, of course
there will be text of course there will
be spikes because there are going to be
days when in a lot of users start using
you, right? So, you might want to have
instead of three instances that you have
defined initially, you want to have 10
instances of a particular service now.
Right? So, you have to just define this
and it will auto scale.
Right? And based on CPU and memory
metric, it is going to auto scale. You
don't need to intervene over here.
Service discovery and networking. So,
instead of making use of this kind of a
URL, you get service names when you run
containers in Kubernetes. So, there is
built-in DNS mechanism that comes into
play and the service names are that are
given are stable enough to use. Right?
Then zero downtime deployments. So, this
is very important. Okay, you want to
deploy version two of your application
without breaking all the users. So, what
you can do is you can have rolling
updates or these are all deployment
strategies that you can implement.
Right? Blue-green deployments or canary
deployments. Infrastructure abstraction.
So, your app does not care
which VM is being used, which cloud is
being used, which IP is being used,
right? Kubernetes handles it all. Okay?
Also,
one thing I would like to mention why
every company uses Kubernetes. So, by
the way, today a lot of production
systems are migrating to Kubernetes. So,
the reason is because modern systems are
microservice based, cloud native, and
distributed and they always need to be
on because the expectations from users
is of high availability. So, they need
to always be on and Kubernetes gives you
reliability, scalability, portability.
So, all the cloud platforms that you
see, AWS, GCP, and Azure, they have
Kubernetes
there. So, if you're learning
Kubernetes, you can use them on any
cloud of your choice like like Amazon,
whether it's Google GCP or Azure, which
is by Microsoft. All right? And that is
why all these startups use it,
enterprises have standardized on it, and
DevOps engineers today must know it. All
right? And to summarize this entire
video, Docker is going to package your
applications, right? And it's going to
package your applications into
containers,
and Kubernetes is going to run and
manage them reliably at the very scale.
I hope this has been super useful and
super clear.
So, now it's time that we begin talking
about history of Kubernetes. Now,
history of Kubernetes is a bit
fascinating, okay? So, it originated
from Google. Yes, Google, the search
engine, the largest search engine that
you know today.
And uh they have also have a lot of
other products, okay? So, inside Google,
there was a real problem, and this was
way back in early 2000s, where Google
was running millions of applications,
right? Uh like uh search, Gmail,
YouTube. And uh they were manually
managing
servers that was impossible, okay?
Because they were uh they had a lot of
machines, and uh huge traffic spikes
used to happen globally, and there were
thousands of services talking to each
other, right? They had this
microservices architecture, and there
were machines failing daily.
And managing these servers was almost
impossible, like you can imagine. And
then, what Google did is they built a
internal system called Borg. They named
it Borg. And this was an internal system
uh which uh worked inside Google, and
what Borg did was it automatically ran
apps on multiple machines, restarted
apps if they crashed, and it scaled up,
scaled down, and even distributed
traffic for them, right? And Borg well
worked so well that Google ran
everything on it. It was amazing for
Google, all right? Because it solved a
real problem that they themselves were
facing. Then then came the era of
containers, all right? And containers
became popular wherein Docker gained a
lot of popularity and this was in the
year 2013 to 2014 wherein containers
made life easy for everyone and Docker's
Docker could be used by developers to
package their application in a clean
way.
Right? Now, the problem over here was
Docker could run containers, but it
could not manage them at scale. And the
same old problem returned, how do we run
thousands of containers reliably? Okay?
So, this is where Kubernetes was born
and this was way back in 2014
where Kubernetes where Google decided to
take ideas from Borg. Yes, so it was
Google who took ideas from the internal
system that they had originally
developed which was called Borg and they
rewrite or they rewrote the entire
system and they open-sourced it for
everyone. Okay? And they called this
project as Kubernetes in 2014.
So, Kubernetes Kubernetes is basically
Borg ideas plus containers. Containers
meaning the platform
or the applications have to be
containerized and it's open source,
okay? So, just to sum it up, Google took
ideas from the internal system that they
built which was called Borg. They
rewrote the entire system and they
open-sourced the system for everyone
else and that system today is called as
Kubernetes. Right? And then Kubernetes
exploded in popularity. And why did it
explode in popularity? Because it solved
a real production problem and it worked
on any cloud like AWS AWS for Amazon,
okay? For Google, we have GCP. And for
Microsoft, we have Azure. So, all three
major cloud companies had Kubernetes
with them and it was open source. So,
there was no vendor lock-in, right? And
then
in 2015, Kubernetes was donated to
CNCF,
which is Cloud Native Computing
Foundation. And this was done to ensure
it was vendor neutral and not controlled
by a single entity,
right? So, so this is the history of
Kubernetes. And Kubernetes today is the
industry standard. Okay, almost every
company uses it directly or indirectly
today.
So, so that's the history and where we
are today with Kubernetes. Now, what
does K8s means, right? So, you will
often hear these terms if you're working
in the field of DevOps or technology,
you're going to hear this field. You're
going to hear this term as K8s. So,
Kubernetes, okay? Kubernetes is long to
say. So, engineers shortened it to K
plus eight letters plus S,
right? So, it's called K8s.
And that is how you know this terms
called K8s was invented. So, K8s is
nothing but Kubernetes itself. It's just
a another way to call Kubernetes.
So, to summarize, Kubernetes started at
Google to solve a real large-scale
container management problem and became
the global standard for running
applications reliably in production,
okay? So, so I hope this has been super
useful.
And just to summarize, Google built
initial system, which was called Borg.
Then Docker popularized container.
And then Kubernetes came into picture
which bought in the Borg style
orchestration to the entire world. And
the main company behind this was Google.
I hope this has been useful.
So now it's time that we begin talking
about the architecture of Kubernetes and
understand what happens behind the
scenes. So Kubernetes works in a cluster
model wherein a cluster is a combination
of control plane and worker nodes. Okay,
so
uh you can actually think of control
plane as the brain who decides what
should happen. And worker nodes are the
ones who actually do the job. Okay? Now
we'll go into the details as to what
happens and what what happens with
control plane and what's there with
worker nodes. Okay, but for now just
remember this that there is a cluster
model that Kubernetes operates in and it
combines of these two things which is
control plane and worker nodes. Okay?
And control plane, like I said, it it is
a decision maker. It decides what should
happen and manages things. And worker
nodes is actually going to run your
application, right? You never deploy
your applications on control plane. You
actually the apps are deployed on worker
nodes. All right? Now let's talk about
control plane first. Now this is control
plane. Control plane, like I said, it's
the brain inside Kubernetes.
And there are some main components that
exist. So these are all the components.
Now you don't need to memorize these
components, okay? You just need to
understand who does what and how things
function. That is what you need to
understand. Don't memorize anything. So
first is API server that I'll talk
about. So API server is basically the
entry gate. It's the central point of
the Kubernetes and all commands go
through the API server. So whatever
commands you're executing, whether it's
through the command line, whether
through the user interface or if it's
through the CI/CD pipeline.
All the commands go through uh
the API server, like I said.
For example, you might run command that
uh says that uh three run three
containers of this particular
application of mine. So, all those
commands are going to be coordinated via
API server. Then you have scheduler.
Now, what is a scheduler? Scheduler
decides which node should run a
particular pod.
Okay? Now, uh what is a pod? If you're
not aware of a pod, pod is basically the
smallest deployable unit. And it's going
to wrap the containers. Okay? That is
what the pod is. So, whenever I refer to
pod, just think of it that way. Okay?
So, uh like I said, uh scheduler decides
which node should run a pod. It looks at
the CPU memory availability to decide
this. Okay? And uh whenever you want to
run a container, uh the scheduler is the
one who's going to decide, "Okay, it it
should run on node two or node three."
Like that. Then you have controller
manager. Now, what is controller
manager? Controller managers
uh is a component who is going to keep a
continuous check. So, it should make it
it will make sure that, "Hey, if uh the
developer had said that uh three
replicas of this particular service
should run or three containers of this
particular service should run or three
instances." So, replica, containers, or
instances, whatever you call it. If you
have said that three instances of this
particular service should run, then
there has to be someone who has to keep
on continuously checking, right? That
three are running or not. So, that job
is being done by controller manager.
Okay? If anything crashes, for example,
if one container crashes because of some
bug, it
it is going to fix it automatically.
Okay? That is the job of controller
manager.
And then you have ETCD.
Now, ETCD is nothing but it's it's like
a memory or the database inside uh the
Kubernetes. So, it's going to store the
cluster's state. Okay? What is the
meaning of a cluster? Like I used this
term cluster. Cluster is nothing but a
group of VMs, okay? So,
the state of all the VMs is going to be
stored in uh etcd, this component, okay?
And it also stores the desired versus
the actual state. Okay? And uh if uh
this particular component is lost, then
the memory of
uh the memory is lost essentially. Okay?
Now,
once we are aware of these uh
components, okay? They they're pretty
simple and they do their own job, then
you need to understand what worker nodes
are. So, this is about control plane,
the control uh the the components within
the control plane. Then there is
something called as worker nodes. Now,
worker nodes can be multiple, okay? Like
they can be multiple worker nodes
depending on the size of application you
are running and each worker node is
usually a virtual machine. So, this is
worker node one over here and this is
worker node two. Now, components uh
reside inside There are some components
that reside inside worker nodes. So,
first is kubelet over here, okay? Now,
what is kubelet? Kubelet is a component
that is going to do the job of talking
to the control plane. It's going to stop
and start the containers and also it is
going to report the containers' health.
Then we have something called as kube
proxy uh that runs on every node in the
Kubernetes cluster and it is responsible
for maintaining the network rules and
enabling the communication between the
pods and the services, okay? So, like I
said, [snorts]
uh every container that you run runs
inside a pod in uh Kubernetes, okay? So,
uh pod is basically the smallest
deployable unit. It is going to wrap the
container. Containers are not going to
run directly. It They are going to run
within pods, okay? And service is
basically a stable network endpoint that
exists in Kubernetes, okay? So, like I
said, uh kube proxy is going to make
sure that it enables the communication
between the pods and the services. Okay?
All of this you would see in action,
okay? But now it's important that you
understand all of this. Right? Uh so,
this is about uh kube proxy. Then you
have container runtime. Now, this is
actually going to do the job of running
the container.
Uh and it is going to provide uh it is
going to make sure that containers run
uh within the worker node. Okay? And
then you have pods within worker nodes.
So, here you can see uh you have
multiple pods. And uh here uh you can
inside the pods you're going to have all
the containers. Now, a pod can have one
container, which is very common, or it
can also have multiple containers
running inside.
Right? So, Kubernetes does not deploy
containers directly. It deploys pods.
And within pods, your containers are
going to run. So, this is the entire
architecture of Kubernetes and what
happens inside. I hope this has been
very clear. See, you don't need to
memorize all of this. You need to
understand just how things function
because if you get any sort of error or
anything, you should know
uh what bro what bro You should
understand the terminologies basically,
right? So, you need to uh understand
here what how things happen, what is the
meaning of worker node, uh what is the
meaning of pod, uh what is kubelet, and
scheduler, API server, controller
manager, what is controller plane. All
of that you need to just understand.
Don't memorize this. All right? Now,
here you can see this is a sort of uh
summary that or highlight point is
control plane is going to decide and
manage everything.
Worker nodes inside the application is
going to run your application. Okay?
Now, let us take a look at a simple
request flow and what happens when you
run this command kubectl apply -f
app.yaml. Okay? Now, this is a kubectl
command. Okay? So, if you want to make
any sort of changes or give sort of
command into Kubernetes, you use
kubectl.
Apply, you are applying a configuration,
and app.yaml has that configuration
defined. So, for example, if you want to
add three replicas or three replicas of
a particular container or something like
that, you define all of that in the YAML
file, and you are applying this. So,
let's say this is an example command
that a user has executed. Now, what is
going to happen? First thing, API server
is going to receive this particular
request, right? And then, the desired
state will be saved in etcd. And this
is, like I said, the memory, right?
Then, the scheduler is going to pick the
worker node that has been selected, and
then kubelet is going to create a pod
for
for making sure that whatever request
has come in to serve that, right? And
then, container runtime is going to run
the particular container as requested in
the configuration that you have
executed, and then controller keeps
watching and fixing it. Controller keeps
a watch. Now, if there are there are no
crashes or anything like that,
everything is working fine, then there
is no sort of fixing that is needed from
the the controller. I hope this is
making sense. So,
uh yes, control plane is the brain
behind the entire working. Worker nodes
are the actual muscles who are actually
doing the job, and then you have pods,
which I can call them as cells, okay,
that are actually doing the actual work.
And within pods, you have all the
containers running. Okay? Now, this
architecture matters.
It's important that you understand this
architecture and how requests flows
within Kubernetes because it gives you
an understanding of how self-healing
works, how scaling works, how rolling
deployments is going to work, how
service discovery, and a lot of other
things that we learn later on when we
are mastering Kubernetes. Okay, it's
really important that you understand
this entire flow. I hope this has been
useful.
So, now is the time that we begin
talking about Kubernetes and how you can
set it up locally onto your system. Now,
by
setting up Kubernetes locally, you would
actually be setting up a Kubernetes
cluster on your local machine and you
will be interacting with them.
Now, the term cluster
I will also
hear this if you are working with
Kubernetes a lot, you are going to hear
this a lot. So, what exactly a cluster
is? So, cluster is nothing but a group
of machines running Kubernetes. Okay,
that that's what it means. And group of
machines meaning nodes that are running
Kubernetes. All right? Now, when you
want to set up Kubernetes locally onto
your system, there are quite a few ways.
Okay, it's just not one way.
Uh there are quite a few ways. Now,
first way is by making use of Docker
Desktop.
Now, Docker Desktop, if you have worked
on Docker, you will already be aware
that Docker Desktop is a program or a
software that enables you to uh work
with Docker on your local machine. You
have to install it onto your system and
then you can run Docker commands. So,
Docker Desktop itself has the ability to
run Kubernetes or set up Kubernetes onto
your local machine. So, if you have
Docker Desktop already installed your
system, what you can do is you can
enable Kubernetes as well. It's just a
checkbox checkbox over there. Right? And
there is no extra setup, okay? And it
has a stable and a clean UI. Okay, so
this is one way. Another way is by using
a tool called Minikube. Now, what is
Minikube? Minikube is a tool or
software, I should say it's a tool, I
should say, that runs Kubernetes in its
own VM.
And if you're using Minikube, you don't
need Docker Desktop, so you can directly
use Minikube. But if you're using
Kubernetes using Docker Desktop, you
have to
keep Docker Desktop open all the time
because that is what is powering the
Kubernetes cluster on your local
machine. Now, Minikube is also very
popular. See, Docker Desktop is quite
popular and you will also find a lot of
tutorials making use of Minikube because
it's also popular. Uh but I'll tell you
there are the commands that you use in
Minikube are slightly different. Okay?
Slightly different. Uh it's not that you
cannot learn it, you can, but slightly
different.
Then the third way is by making use of
kind, which is Kubernetes in Docker.
So, what you can do is you can run
Kubernetes clusters inside Docker
containers, and uh this is also a way.
Okay? So, there are three ways, and what
I'll be doing is I will be going ahead
with Docker Desktop approach. Uh and
there is a reason for this, okay?
Because if you enable Docker Desktop, uh
the commands that you run are very close
to the commands that you will run in
production. Okay? Uh of course, you can
learn Minikube and other tools as well
later on. Okay? But uh but you know, to
start with, I feel Docker Desktop, like
Kubernetes in Docker Desktop, is the
right way. And uh what I will do now is
I'll come over here to the browser. And
this is the official website of
Kubernetes, which is kubernetes.io. So,
just head over to this website, and you
can read more about Kubernetes over
here. So, you can see over here, it is
also known as K8s. It's an open source
system for automating deployment,
scaling, and management of containerized
applications. Right?
So, you can check out this website. You
can see all the features over here, like
these are the key features of
Kubernetes. And I'll tell you if you're
visiting this website, they keep on
updating the UI every now and then. So,
depending on when you're watching uh or
when you're visiting when you're
watching this video, okay, you might see
a little bit changes here and there. So,
don't stress. The information and the
problem it solves remains the same,
right? It's just the UI. So, you can
come over here to documentation now and
click on tasks and then click on install
tools. Now, here you will see some set
of tools that you that
that you have over here. Okay, let's
talk about each one of them. So, this uh
this is kubectl. Okay. Uh some people
call it kubectl, some people call it
cube ctl. I've heard people uh saying
kubectl. So, whatever you pronounce it,
but I'll say kubectl. This is a
Kubernetes command line tool.
Okay?
Now, this is a tool that allows you to
interact with Kubernetes clusters. So,
if you have Kubernetes already set up,
you can make use of this tool to
interact with Kubernetes clusters,
right? You can use it to deploy So, you
can see over here, you can use it to
deploy application, inspect, manage
cluster resources, view logs, and
everything.
Right? So, so that is what kubectl is.
Do we have to install it? So, if you're
making use of Docker Desktop for
Kubernetes, you don't have to install it
because it comes pre-packaged with it.
Right? So, it's you directly get access
to it out of the box. Okay? So, that's
kubectl. Does it Does kubectl run
Kubernetes clusters? No.
kubectl is a tool that allows you to
interact with uh Kubernetes clusters.
Remember that. It allows you to interact
with Kubernetes cluster. You don't set
up your
kubectl does not have
Kubernetes clusters, right? You have You
need to have Kubernetes clusters
running.
So, if you're using Docker Desktop and
if you enable Kubernetes on your local
machine, then you you get access to
kubectl as well because it comes
inbuilt, and then you can interact with
Kubernetes clusters. I hope this makes
sense.
Kind. Now, what is kind? Kind lets you
uh run Kubernetes on your local machine.
Okay? And this tool requires either
Docker or Podman installed. Okay? So,
this is another way. Minikube, like I
discussed. So, we already spoke about
kind. We Now, Minikube is also listed
over here. So, like kind, Minikube is
also a tool that allows you to run
Kubernetes locally. Okay? You can see
over here. Minikube runs in all-in-one
or a multi-node local cluster on your
personal computer. Okay? And this is
Minikube, and you can check out
Minikube's guide over here. They've
linked it to it. So, if you want to just
read, and if you're curious,
you can check out um Minikube Minikube
tutorial as well over here. Okay? You
can see over here.
Okay? You'll also see some requirements
that are needed. Okay? Like two CPUs, 2
GB of free memory, 20 GB. Okay? And all
the uh
commands have been given over here.
All right, that's okay. There is one
more tool called kubeadm.
Now, this is also used to create and
manage clusters.
Okay? Uh but yeah, so uh like I said,
Minikube is very popular. Okay? You'll
see a lot of tutorials around Minikube.
And kubectl is a tool It It It does not
set up the It does not have Kubernetes
in it. Okay? It is just a tool to
interact with Kubernetes. Okay? So, what
I will do is I'll first now come over
here.
And here I have opened Docker Desktop.
Okay? This is Docker Desktop.
Head over to settings over here on the
top, right? Okay? And we are going to
enable Kubernetes. So, just head over to
settings, and then click on the
left-hand side, just click on Kubernetes
like I'm doing.
And you'll see enable Kubernetes. Start
a Kubernetes engine or a multi-node
cluster when starting Docker Desktop.
So, I'll say apply. Oh, sorry. Enable.
And you'll see it's making use of uh
it's asking you whether you want to make
use of kubeadm or kind.
So, I'm just going to make sure the
default one over here is selected. I
won't enable show system containers.
Okay, and I'm going to say apply. So,
show system containers like you can see
over here, show Kubernetes internal
containers when you're running Docker
commands. So, this can actually
confuses. There might be some Docker
containers that Kubernetes might have
internally running. Okay, uh these might
be internal containers, right? And I
don't want to
uh have them in the output, right? So,
I'll I'll just keep that unchecked and
I'll say apply. Now, the moment you say
apply, it'll say the installation it's
going to install the Kubernetes cluster.
And installation is going to take few
minutes and it is going to require an
internet connection. So, make sure you
have an active internet connection. And
I'll just say install.
Now, you can see over here
it is starting and it is pulling all the
images that is needed. So, Qubedium
image it's pulling. There's one node and
this is a version. Now, version number
might be different depending on when
you're watching the video. But, don't
worry they keep on releasing every new
version every now and then. Okay, so
nothing much changes. Uh and things and
the process will remain as it is. Now,
I'll wait for a while. It'll take some
time when in it's going to pull all the
images and set up a local Kubernetes
cluster. Okay, so just hang in there.
Now, it took some time. And now I you I
can see running over here. Okay, I also
got a success message. So, I'll just say
close over here.
And uh yeah, it you will see some
additional containers up like that might
appear over here. You can see like these
are some additional images that have
been pulled. Okay.
And here on the bottom okay, here on the
bottom bar within Docker Desktop you're
going to see this message which is
Kubernetes running. Okay, this is the
RAM it's consuming, the CPU it's
consuming and everything. So, Docker is
also running over here, Kubernetes is
also running. Okay. If you click on
Kubernetes over here, you will have this
Kubernetes option on the left-hand side.
You can see in the left-hand side uh
this menu you will have Kubernetes
option and you can see over here it's
it's running this way.
Right? So, yes, we have successfully set
up Kubernetes onto our local machine.
Now, what we can do is let us
run a few commands. So, I'll come over
here, okay? Now, to run the commands and
interact with Kubernetes cluster, I'm
going to make use of kubectl. And like I
said, kubectl comes already bundled uh
with Kubernetes on Docker Desktop. So,
I'm going to say kubectl over here,
version and I'm going to say client,
okay? So, I am getting the client
version and you can see over here client
version is 1.34.1
and this is the customized version. You
might see different version, okay?
Because they keep on releasing
version numbers every now and then. So,
this might become this last digit might
become three or five. They might release
a new version. So, don't worry about
that, okay? Everything else remains the
same.
And another command you can run is
kubectl
uh get nodes, okay? So, you're going to
see Docker Desktop
and it would be termed as okay. Sorry.
So, I did a spelling mistake. kube
ctl, okay? kubectl get nodes, okay? So,
you can see over here these are the
different nodes, okay? It's it's not
well formatted.
Okay.
Okay, so this should have ideally given
the right output, but this is not giving
the right output. So,
uh
one way is uh it has not fully started
yet, okay? Because Kubernetes takes time
to uh start.
Uh but, I don't think that is the case
in
uh my
on my machine because I have I've waited
for a while, I paused the video and
waited for a while, but it is still not
uh done this. So, if you face this kind
of an issue, I'm not going to edit this
from the video. I'm going to fix this
live. So, if you face this kind of
issue, uh just come to settings over
here, go to Kubernetes, and okay, so
there is no restart option here. What I
would do is I would reset the cluster.
So, I'll say reset anyways, okay. And
this is going to stop the cluster.
And
then here, so it's starting the cluster
here.
And once the complete reset is done for
the cluster, I'm going to say apply. So,
it is going to restart reset and restart
the Kubernetes cluster. So, this will
take some time. I'll wait for a minute.
So, here you can see it's running now,
and I'll say close over here, and I'll
come over here. Let me run this command
again. Okay, so it's not running yet.
So, what I will do is I'll clear
everything.
I'll zoom in a bit so that you can see
the commands clearly that I'm running.
So, I'm going to say cube cuddle over
here. I'll say config {dot} get context.
So, I'm trying to get the context that
Kubernetes is using. Okay.
So, you can see over here, I have used
Kubernetes in past, and I already have
minikube installed onto my system. Okay,
I I keep doing experiments. I have
minikube already, and the problem over
here that happened with my machine is
it's making use of minikube. Okay, I
want to make use of Docker Desktop, and
that is why since minikube is not
started, it was not showing us the
notes. This was the main reason. Okay,
so what I will do is I'm going to say
cube cuddle over here, config
and I'll say use context and I'll say
Docker Desktop. Something like this, and
I'll say enter. Switch to context Docker
Desktop. And now if I try to get the
context again, I'm going to see this
option that it's making use of Docker
Desktop. Okay, so I hope the issue on my
machine is clear to you.
Kubectl was pointing to minikube. Why?
Because I'm already a Kubernetes user
and have used minikube in past. So,
minikube was already configured on onto
my system. And I wanted to make use of
Docker Desktop, like Kubernetes within
Docker Desktop.
And I was trying to get the nodes, but
kubectl was pointing to minicube. So,
there were no nodes. So, if you see
uh the previous command that we ran,
okay, the previous command like get
nodes, now it'll show Docker Desktop.
Okay? But, if the context is set to
if the context is set to minicube.
Earlier, it was set to minicube. Why it
was set to minicube? Because
I've used minicube in past. So, you can
see your minicube is not up and running.
So, kubectl is pointing
So, okay, uh it's not getting any nodes
there, okay? And I thought there's a
problem with Docker Desktop, and we did
reset and all. But, that was not the
case. So, I'll switch the context to
Docker Desktop, and then I'll get the
nodes, and you can see over here Docker
Desktop is ready. Okay? You should not
face this challenge if you have never
used Kubernetes or any tool around
Kubernetes on your system.
But, if you've used tools like minicube
or something like that by following
other tutorials in past, okay, you
should face this issue, and uh you now
know how you can fix it.
I hope uh this has been useful, and I
hope you all had some fun.
So, now it's time that we begin talking
about pods and deployments, and
understand what these are. And uh trust
me, if you're working with Kubernetes or
if you plan to be a long-term developer
with Kubernetes, you're going to hear
about pods, deployments a lot, okay? And
if you will be writing a lot of
deployments, and uh those deployments
will create pods, okay? So, let's talk
about what these are, okay? So, first we
talk about the pod. So, pod is basically
the actual running app. Okay? The actual
app that is running in Kubernetes, okay?
And this app will be wrapped in a
Kubernetes layer.
And uh it runs uh
Pod is where basically where your app
lives and run. That is what I mean to
say. It It's like a house, okay? Where
your app is going to reside and it is
going to run. So, that that is what I
mean by saying it's it's a
container wrapped in Kubernetes layer,
okay? I hope this makes sense and it's
the smallest deployable unit in
Kubernetes. That is something that you
need to remember. Now, let's talk about
deployment.
So, deployment is a component in
Kubernetes that runs your app
continuously. So, if your pod crashes,
Kubernetes is going to restart it
automatically and it does it with the
help of deployment. And if you want more
copies when after deploying the app, if
you want more copies of your app, which
which we call it as a scaling, okay?
Deployment is going to handle it. So,
let's say like if if you run a
e-commerce website and if there is going
to be a spike in orders and you want to
scale up order service, so, you would be
needing more instances or more copies of
order service, right? So, you're going
to
update the deployment for the same and
Kubernetes is going to handle it, okay?
If you want zero downtime updates,
deployment does the rolling updates. So,
there is a concept of rolling updates
that you can have and if you have a new
version that is supposed to be released,
so without having any sort of downtime,
you can basically roll out a new update,
okay?
So, with deployment, you can always have
or sorry, so with deployment, you can
always have your app running
and
Kubernetes is going to restart if it
dies and it is also going to allow it to
update easily, okay? Now,
one question that you might have is if
you heard or if you have learned about
the Kubernetes architecture, there is a
component called controller manager that
you see over here. This where my mouse
pointer is. Within control plane, there
is a component called controller
manager, okay? And what I had told you
is controller manager or if even if you
read up online, you will know that
controller manager
is the one that makes sure that if there
is it keeps a track of whether the pods
are running or not. And if anything
crashes, it is going to automatically
restart. Right? It is going to
automatically restart.
And right now when explaining
deployment, okay? I said that uh hey,
uh deployment is actually going to make
sure that uh nothing crashes and if
anything crashes, you can define the
replicas and all. If anything crashes,
okay? It is going to restart and all.
So, what I've observed is whenever
beginners learn this, okay? They go a
little bit confused between this
component which is controller manager
which is actually monitoring all the
pods and if anything crashes,
it restarts and then you have this
deployment component which is also doing
the same thing, okay? So, I would want
to clear the air over here and I would
want to explain
what is the difference between
deployment and a controller manager,
okay? So, see deployment is an
instruction that is coming from you.
You as a developer will define
deployment files. You will create
deployment. So, it's a component or
instructions that is coming in from you.
You are defining your desired state of
your application. So, let's say you want
three replicas replicas meaning three
copies of your application running.
Right? So, you would define that in the
deployment.yaml file. There is a
configuration file for deployment. You
will define it over there and you will
This is like you're declaring the state
that you wish your app to be always in.
Okay? And controller manager
is going to receive or it it is going to
check that deployment component and it's
a worker, okay? So, what it's going to
do is it is going to follow the
instructions that you have defined in
deployment.
I hope this is making sense. It is
actually going to follow the
instructions that you have defined in
the deployment. So, how things work is
you create a deployment YAML file, then
EPS server is going to store it. Okay,
it is going to store it in the storage
of the Kubernetes. Controller manager is
going to see it, and then controller
manager is going to manage it.
Okay? I hope this is clear. Okay, I hope
this is clear. And I hope you all are
clear between the difference of of the
two. Okay? Uh generally beginners got
confused, so I thought I'll emphasize a
bit on this.
So, now it's time that we are going to
create our first
deployment. Okay? And with the help of
deployment, a pod is going to be
created. Okay? So, first we'll check if
there are any pods running on our local
machine, and the command for this is
cube cuddle.
Okay? Uh get
pods, like so. So, you will see there
are no resources in the form name space,
which means or which indicates that
there are no pods running. Now, what I'm
going to do is I'm going to say cube
cuddle.
I'll say create deployment. Okay? And
I'm going to So, this is the command
basically using which you can create a
new deployment always in Kubernetes.
Okay? Cube cuddle create deployment.
Now, how are you creating the
deployment? So, I'm going to specify the
name of the deployment, which is web.
Okay? I'm going to mention the image
over here. So, I'm going to say image is
equal to and you can specify the image
name over here. So, the image name I'm
specifying is Nginx.
Okay? So, this is what I'm doing. Okay?
So, I'll just reiterate. I'm saying cube
cuddle dot Sorry, cube cuddle create
deployment.
Okay? So, cube cuddle is basically the
tool.
Create deployment is the command that is
instructing to create a new deployment
object. Web is the name of the
deployment that I'm creating, and image
is the image that I'm specifying. So,
this image is being will be used from
Docker Hub by default. Okay? And a pod
will be created using this. Okay? So,
I'll say enter.
And you can see over here, deployment
dot apps {slash} web is created. Okay?
So you can see over here, this is
created. Now if I run this command
kubectl get pods, you're going to see
that there is one pod that is running.
Okay? So, one question I would have is
did we create pods? No, we create
deployments.
Right? And as a result of creating the
deployment, pods got created. Who
creates pod? So as a developer, we do
not directly create pods. Pods are
created by the control plane within
control plane. If I have to be specific,
it's the controller manager who creates
the pod for us. So as a developer, we
always create deployments and it's the
control plane within Kubernetes that
does the job of uh uh that does the job
of creating and managing pods.
So I hope this has been useful.
So now it's time that we begin talking
about services in Kubernetes. Now, what
are services? So,
you have a pod running in Kubernetes,
right? Whenever you run any sort of
application, it runs within a pod. Now,
pod by itself is not accessible, okay?
And pod is invisible to the outside
world beyond cluster. And pods are such
that they keep on crashing, restarting,
okay? So so it's not sure that the IP
address that is even assigned to the pod
that is going to be stable, right? So so
this this is a problem and this is where
services or service component in
Kubernetes comes into picture.
So service says, I am going to give you
uh give your application a permanent IP
and I'm going to let you and all the
other apps talk to your application.
Okay? So basically it is allowing you to
expose your application to the outside
world and also within the cluster
itself. So within the cluster, you know,
see So there are multiple services that
might be running within Kubernetes. So
you might have 10 services, one for
order, payments, notifications. They
might want to talk within themselves as
well. Right? And the outside world might
also want to access these services. So
both these use cases are satisfied or
fulfilled with the help of this
component called service. So service
gives your application a permanent IP,
okay? It lets other application inside
the cluster talk to it.
And it lets you expose it to the
browser.
Why node port? Now, what is node port?
Node port is a kind of service type,
which we'll be talking about shortly,
okay? So service basically gives your
application a stable address so that
browsers and other apps can reach it.
I hope this makes sense. Now, there are
few service types that you should be
aware of. First is cluster IP. This is
one of the service types. Then you have
node port.
Then you have load balancer.
And then you have external name. Now,
these are some of the service types that
exist.
Now, let us talk about cluster IP. Now,
what is cluster IP? So cluster IP is
going to expose your application within
the cluster itself. And your application
won't be accessible from the browser,
okay? It is useful when back end is
talking to back end and within the
microservices communication. So if there
is service-to-service communication
within your application, then you can
make use of cluster IP, okay? Because,
you know, it is not going to allow other
services access it from the browser.
Other services within the Kubernetes
cluster can talk to each other. Can talk
to them if if they're making use of
cluster IP, okay? I hope this is making
sense. So you should use cluster IP when
you don't want your service to be
accessible from outside the Kubernetes
cluster.
And you just want it to remain
accessible inside the Kubernetes
cluster, which is other services will
continue accessing it. That's cluster
IP. Then you have
node port. Now, what is node port? Node
port is going to expose your app on a
node ports nodes port IP.
Okay? Nodes port and IP. Okay? Now, what
does this mean? So, it allows you to
access your It allows you to access your
application from the browser. You can
access it using a IP and a port number.
So, IP plus port. Okay? On your node.
That is That is how node port uh the
name arise. Okay? And there is a range
of the port that you're seeing. Okay?
It's 30,000 to some 32,767.
And it is generally used for local
testing, demos, or for learning
Kubernetes.
All right? Then you have load balancer.
Now, what load balancer does is it is
going to create a cloud load balancer.
And it is going to give you a public IP
or a DNS. Okay? And this works best on
cloud services like AWS,
uh which is by Amazon. Uh by Google you
have GCP. And by Microsoft you have
Azure. And this is majorly used in
production applications with real users.
So, when you take your application to
production, you switch to load balancer.
And you also have external name. This is
also one kind of service.
Okay? One kind of service type. What
this does is it is going to map the
service to an external DNS. Okay? And it
is uh used for external DB or
third-party API. And this is a bit
advanced. And it is rarely or less used
is what I would say. Okay? So, these are
the kind of services that exist. And
just to summarize over here, you're
going to uh the this is a summary table
over here. So, cluster IP is accessible
from inside the cluster. And it is used
uh when you want to do microservice to
microservice communication. Like within
the microservices you want to do
communication, you should use cluster
IP. Because cluster IP does not expose
your app to the outside world. NodePort,
it is going to ex- expose it from IP and
port, like from within your browser. And
it is good for local testing or
learning. LoadBalancer is going to
access it from the public internet. It's
It's going to allow it from
accessibility from the public internet,
and it is good for production.
External name is going to map your
services to external DNS, and it is good
if you want your application to be
accessed by outside services. Okay?
So, so this is how things work, okay?
You have deployment. Deployment is going
to create and manage pods, okay? You You
You define a deployment, and then
Kubernetes is going to create a pod for
you, okay? And it is It is going to run
your app. An example app that you can
run is Nginx. Then you have service. So,
you've created a pod using deployment,
right? You've created a pod using
deployment. How do you access it? So,
you can make use of service that can
give you a stable connection to the pod.
And NodePort is a service type that lets
you access a service from your laptop.
If you're trying to access a service
within your laptop,
for the pod that you are running
locally, you can make use of NodePort
service type, okay? Now, you have
browser,
right? So, the request will go to the
NodePort, which is
So, NodePort is going to give you the
host and the
the port, okay? And from there it is
going to go to the service, and service
is going to take it to the pod, and then
pod is going to take it to the
container. Because within pod you will
have your container running.
I hope this entire explanation makes
sense, and I hope this has been super
useful.
So, right now what we've done is we have
a pod running, which
which is this pod where Nginx is
running, okay? So, I'm just going to
clear this, and I'm going to say get
pods, and you can see over here this pod
is actually up and running.
What I'm going to do is I'm going to try
and access this particular uh service.
That Sorry, not the service. Try and
access the Nginx welcome page. Okay.
It's running within Kubernetes, and I
want a way for me to
to access it. Okay. So, what I'm going
to do is I'm going to first expose my
application, which is Nginx, using a
service. So, I'm going to say
kubectl over here, kubectl,
expose deployment,
and the deployment name is web, and I'm
going to say type over here. Okay. So,
we need to now specify the type of the
service that we want to make use of. So,
type is equal to node port.
Be sure of the capitalization over here,
and then mention over here port is equal
to 80. Okay. So, what this command is
doing is we are saying expose
We We are making use of this tool,
kubectl, then we are saying expose this
deployment which with the name web,
okay, because we've created the
application deployment with the name
web, right? And I'm saying make use of
the service type as port
over here, and the port within the
container is 80 because Nginx by default
is running on port 80. The moment I say
enter, it'll say service/web exposed.
Right? This is a confirmation. So, what
I can do now is I can say kubectl
get SVC. So, this is a command that will
help us check the service. And you can
see over here,
uh web basically
is uh giving the output as node port,
and you can see this is a cluster IP.
And you can see the uh port 80 within
the container is exposed on port 30241
on my local machine,
as you can see over here. Okay. 80 is
the app's internal port, and 30241 is
the port open on my machine. And this is
the cluster's internal IP. Okay, this is
something that we can ignore for now.
Okay. So, this port is what is
important. Cube CTL get SVC web.
Okay, I'll say enter. Okay, and you can
see okay, get SVC web. So, you will see
this
uh get SVC web. So, now I'm just getting
the SVC the service web over here. Okay,
and I'll see take 30241.
And I'll head over to the browser. I'll
say localhost colon 30241.
And you can see over here.
This is nginx. Okay, so what happened
now? When we hit this URL, okay, this
request went to node port service.
And then from node port service
it uh basically went to the pod. And
then from pod we are actually seeing uh
the nginx container's welcome page. You
can see over here. So, this is running
now on Kubernetes exposed uh via
service. And the service type that we
have used is node port. And we uh
created a deployment with the with
deployment created pod for us. And
within the pod we have nginx container
running. I hope this is making sense.
So, at the bottom at the cracks we have
nginx container running within Docker.
Uh nginx container it it's uh just a
container that is running. Where it is
is it running? It is running inside a
pod.
Right? And who created the pod? We have
not Kubernetes created it with the help
of deployment that we specified.
And it this pod is exposed uh via
service. And the service type that we
are using is node port. I hope this
entire thing is making sense now. Okay,
and congratulations, you now have
your first container
that you can access and it's up and
running within Kubernetes. Okay? So,
this is a command to get all the
services and this is a command to get
the details of a particular service. I
hope this has been useful.
So, now it's time that we begin talking
about replica sets. Now what are replica
sets? So if a pod crashes in Kubernetes
and it's supposed to be available, then
Kubernetes restarts that particular pod
using something called as replica set.
Okay? So let me give you a
demonstration. So here, if you
run this, you have this pod that is
already running. Okay? What I'm going to
do is I am going to delete this pod. So
I'm going to say cube CTL cube cuddle.
I'm going to take the name of the pod.
This is the entire name of the pod,
okay? And I'm going to say delete pod
and then pod name.
Now you'll see this pod has been
deleted. But now if I say get pod, you
will see that this pod is already
being created now. So this was deleted
actually, right? So earlier this pod
existed. Okay? Then we deleted this pod,
right? Can you see this? We deleted this
pod. And then now you can see Kubernetes
is recreating the pod and you can see
you can verify that with the help of the
status container creating. Right? So
it's actually creating. It's not in the
running status yes yet when we ran this
command. Now if I run this command, you
will see that it's now in the running
status. So initially it was creating
that particular container, creating that
particular pod. Okay? So what happens is
Kubernetes
to Kubernetes we have when creating the
deployment we had told that we want a
deployment of this particular with this
particular app and I need one instance.
So we did not specify the instance, but
by default one instance is what is
needed, right? And what Kubernetes is
doing is it is always trying to match
the desired state that we mentioned as a
developer. So when creating the
deployment, we said we want one copy of
this particular app always running,
right? When creating this deployment we
said that engine X we want this
deployment to be running, right? It had
it created one pod as a result, right?
Now when we try to delete that pod,
Kubernetes is trying to match the
desired state mentioned by the
developer. And as a result, if you try
to delete the pod, it is going to
recreate it because at least one
instance is what is needed by the
developer, right? And I can also
demonstrate this to you in a separate
window. Okay, so generally doing this
sort of demonstrations
uh separate window is uh
recommended. So, what I would do is I
have this window, okay?
And here I have this another window.
Okay, so what I will do is
here you can see I'll say
I'll run get pods in the watch mode
{hyphen} w, okay?
Now, what it will do is it is
continuously running and keeping a tab
of what sort of uh pods are running,
okay? I'll say clear.
Oh, wait a minute. I'll just stop this.
I'll say control C. I'll say clear. And
then I'll run this, okay? So, you will
have this running always at the top. The
screen is clear. Now, here I'm going to
say
I'm going to say cube CTL delete, okay?
And uh delete pod and I'll mention the
pod name. Now, what is the pod name? So,
this is the pod name. I'll just copy
this.
Oops, so I'll go over here and I'll
paste this. And I'll say enter. So, you
can see you can see over here the entire
process, okay? Here Here you can see the
entire process. Can you see the entire
process? It was initially running.
Okay, then I ran the delete command. So,
this got terminated. And then here you
can see this new
pod was immediately created. You can see
and it was in the pending state. This is
a new pod.
Right? And while this was being
terminated, okay? This was in pending
state. And then this
started container creating.
Okay? And uh this deletion of this was
completed. And then this started
running.
Can you see the entire uh trace uh using
this option of {hyphen} w. Now, {hyphen}
w is a useful option, very useful
option. It means watch mode. So, you are
running this command in the watch mode,
okay? And what this command tells is
what this option in fact tells is a
hyphen W means keep watching the changes
that are happening with this command.
And whatever changes are happening, it
is going to show you all the live
changes and you can see all the live
changes like how one pod was terminated
because of a command we ran and how
Kubernetes tried to,
you know, match the state of
of the match the desired state that is
mentioned that was mentioned by the
developer, okay? And this entire
process, this process that you're seeing
over here is called as Kubernetes
self-healing. This is a self-healing
property or a feature of Kubernetes. I
hope this is making sense and I hope
this demonstration is turning out to be
useful. So, I'll just close this another
terminal that I had opened and I'll just
exit this watch mode by clicking on
control C on Windows and command C on
Mac, okay? So, I've not exited. Now,
how is this happening? So, this is
happening with a component called
replica set and there is So, you will
say I have not created any replica set.
So, yes, replica set was created
automatically, okay? So, you can say
kubectl get RS, which is So, you will
get this
replica set over here. And you can see
over here desired count
is one over here, okay? Current count is
one and ready state is one, okay? And
age is 82 minute of this replica set.
You can also say kubectl
describe
RS and you can
like get this replica set described. So,
it is going to give you the complete
description of this particular replica
set as to
what is the label and everything like
who owns like who is controlling this,
right? So, you can see over here this is
being this replica set is being
controlled by the web deployment and web
deployment is a deployment that we have
defined over here. Which image is it
using? It is using this engine x image
over here.
Okay? So, this is uh how you can see and
uh yeah, so this is about replica set.
Replica set is something that we have uh
not created. Now, this replica set we
had not created. It was created by
Kubernetes itself. When we define
deployments, these things like replica
set and all are created behind the
scenes, right? And this is what makes
sure that the state uh is met, like the
desired and current state is kept track
of, okay? And things uh work the way
developer always wants it. I hope this
has been useful.
So, now I'm going to show you how you
can scale your application to handle
more traffic, okay? So, here if you say
cube CTL get pods, okay? Uh we have one
pod running, okay? Uh what I'm going to
do is I'm going to run this in watch
mode. Okay, 1 second. So, I'll just
clear everything. I like running watch
mode in a clear screen. So, we have one
pod running, okay? Now, I'm going to
have another instance of uh the terminal
and here I'm going to run another
command. So, I'm going to say cube CTL
and I'm going to say scale deployment
and I'm going to say web
hyphen two times and I'm going to say
replicas is equal to
five. Now, whichever how many number of
instances you want, you have to mention
that with this replica replicas in
replicas option over here, okay? So,
what you're saying is using cube CTL,
you're communicating to the Kubernetes
cluster. You're saying scale my
deployment. The name of the deployment
is web and scale it to have the replicas
five. And the moment you say enter, you
can see five new instances, like four
new instances will be created. One
instance is already there that is
running, okay? And you can see four
instances were created.
Right? You can see over here.
All the four new instances are created.
Can you see?
Right? So, this is how you scale things,
okay? And now if you exit watch mode,
and if you just run get pods without
watch mode, you're going to see your
application is up and running. And there
are four There are uh five pods. One pod
was already there, and there are five
pods now that are running, okay? And uh
you can actually see uh this is the
replica set over here. Okay? You can
actually describe this replica set,
okay? And if I were to describe this
replica set, okay? And if you scroll up,
you're going to see the desired count of
the replicas is five now. The current is
five, and the ready state is five.
Okay? So, why five? Because we have
updated the replicas over here, right?
We have updated the replicas over here
using this option, okay? So,
from the developer's standpoint, how
things work is you update uh you update
the deployment. You say that, "Hey, I
want five replicas of this particular
app running."
Behind the scenes, replica set is
updated. You don't update replica set.
Uh Kubernetes does that.
Replica set is updated to the desired
count of five, okay? And then uh uh
uh Kubernetes checks the replica set uh
has current state of one, okay? So,
initially there was only one instance
there, right? So, what it does is
desired is five, so it'll try to match
the current state to that of desired
state. And it'll add four It added four
more containers, like you could see.
Right? And four more pods were added,
and uh then we could verify it, okay? On
verification, we could see like there
are five pods running. Now, you can
again have this running in the watch
mode. Let me have this in the watch
mode.
Okay? Like this. And I'll scale the
deployment again. I'll scale it down
now, okay? So, let's say uh my
e-commerce website had a lot of traffic,
okay? Uh like there is a let's say Black
Friday sale that is going on a new year
sale that is going on.
And I scaled my order service like this.
I scaled it to more instances. Now the
traffic is gone and the sale is ending.
So I want to scale it down. So I can
scale it down like this. I can say one
replica one. So you can see
it it's terminating everything.
Okay, it's terminating everything and
now there will only be a one pod that
will exist. So if I say cube CTL get
pods like so, you can see only one pod
running.
Right? So this way you can scale up and
scale down really really easily
with replica set. And you it's totally
in your control. Okay, and as a
developer you feel that power. Okay, and
this these things that I'm showing you
are really helpful when you start
working on production grade applications
like scaling up your application,
scaling down based on the traffic. These
all things
is what matter. Okay, you are doing it
seamlessly
with the help of this amazing tool
called Kubernetes.
Hey there. So now it's time that we talk
about rollouts, okay, or application
updates. See
whenever you're working in production or
any sort of application you're building,
there is going to be updates in your
application, right? You would want to
roll out updates. And generally what
happens is whenever you roll out
updates, if you're using traditional
methods
there will be application downtime,
which you cannot avoid because you would
be actually replacing and deployment
will happen. It will take some time
depending on the complexity of your
application.
But with tools like Kubernetes, okay,
you can actually roll out a deployment
like you can roll out a update
basically, a version update
with zero downtime. Okay, and
enterprises, trust me, these days expect
having zero downtime because, you know,
we are living in an internet world and
uh everybody wants the application to be
up all the time. And um like if
application going down if application
goes down, it's a revenue loss for the
companies. So, they want 100% uptime.
So, I'm going to show you how Kubernetes
makes your life easy over here, okay?
So, first of all,
I'm going to say cube cuddle get pods.
We have this one pod running. What I'm
going to do is uh this particular pod is
running Nginx, right? And it is running
the latest image of Nginx because when
creating the deployment, we had not
specified uh the uh image,
right? The image version, right? So,
what I'm going to do is I'm going to say
uh cube cuddle,
and I'm going to say uh in set
image deployment /web for this
particular deployment. What you can do
is uh you say Nginx
= Nginx
: 1.25. Now, this is one of the
versions, okay? One of the image
versions that I have uh for Nginx. You
can change this to any version, okay?
So, what I'm saying is for uh using cube
cuddle, interact with the cluster, set
the image for this particular
deployment, and the image is Nginx image
should be 1.25. Now, the moment you say
this, you will see the uh image is
updated. And if you go over here, okay?
Now, you can watch the rollout happen,
okay? Now, how can you watch the
rollout? So, for that, you'll have to
make use of cube CTL,
and you'll have to say rollout status
deployment
/web, okay? Now, if you press enter, you
will see uh waiting for the deployment
web rollout to finish. One old replicas
are pending termination. Okay, one old
replicas are pending termination, and
then the deployment has been
successfully rolled out. So, this gives
you the status. This command actually
gives you the status of any sort of uh
like uh
update or rollout out you're are
Okay? Now, what I can do is I can see if
actually the image was updated. Okay, so
you can go to cube CTL and you can say
describe and I can say
over here. Okay, I missed e over here.
Cube CTL
and you can describe this image. Okay,
so
uh the pod actually was deleted and
restarted because you updated the image.
Okay, so first I'll have to get the pods
now and then I'll have to describe this
pod. Okay.
So I'll have to copy this.
Because the older pod was deleted and
I'll have to get this Oops, so it's not
uh describing this cube uh CTL.
Okay, so I missed
a pod keyword over here. Okay, that is
why it was not working. Okay, so I added
this pod keyword. Describe the pod.
Okay, now you can see over here. Okay,
uh you can see uh this these are some of
the events that have happened within
this pod. You can see how it pulled the
image 1.25 and it successfully
updated this image. You can see over
here and container was started. So the
this these are some of the events that
you're seeing inside uh this particular
uh you know, this particular pod. Okay,
so you can see it's actually using the
image that you specified.
Right? And there was no downtime.
Okay, you you can see a lot of things
inside. Okay, and uh here
I think there has to be a label
that mentions the image. You can see the
image over here. So there's that label.
Okay, it mentions the image name. Okay,
so it's using the version that we are
using. Now what I can do is I can again
update the roll out over here. I can say
instead of 1.25 now I want latest
version of Engine X.
I'll say this and then I'll uh check the
roll out update. So you can see waiting
for the roll out to finish. The roll out
has finished and I can now again get the
pods because the pods name will change.
Okay, you can see this is the pod name.
Okay, what was what was it earlier?
So you can see earlier it was g8tkv,
okay? And now it's qh9hg,
right? So, now what I will do is I'll
just describe the spot over here. Okay,
I'll just get rid of this name. I'll
copy this name properly.
And I'll describe the spot. Now, if you
describe the spot, you will see some
events here at the bottom. Okay, you
will clearly see that it pulled out
Engine-X latest. And here if you scroll
up, okay, you will see the image that is
being used is Engine-X latest. Okay? So,
this way you can actually
you can actually see the rollout happen
in real time wherein and whenever you do
a rollout, okay, the pods that are using
the old images, okay, pods pods
containing containers using the old
image are deleted and new pods are
parallelly started and they're replaced
with the new old pods. Okay? So, that is
how the thing works and the traffic
never stops.
It basically performs a switch from old
to new. So, first the new pods are
created and then the old ones are
replaced with the new ones. That is how
things work. Okay? I hope this is clear
as to how this is
this rollout is happening and how there
is zero downtime and I've actually
proven to you that you can actually
update the image names image versions
over here. So, how it will work is see
if you're working in a microservices
architecture or in a monolith
application, you will basically have the
image okay like the application
containerized and they will be
the image tags that you will add which
will act as a version.
Right? And these image tags
like let's say if you are running your
application on version one
and let's say you made some changes in
the application code. Now, you want to
release that as version two. So, what
you will do is you will create an image
with the tag version two. You will push
it to remote Docker registry, okay? And
then in Kubernetes wherever you are
running the Kubernetes in whichever
cloud, okay, you will come and you will
say "Hey, now use this particular image
version." And automatically the
deployment will update itself. It will
pull the latest image from the
the remote registry whichever you are
using and whichever you have configured,
and it will update it. That is how the
entire process works. I hope this has
been useful.
So, let's start talking about the
importance of app selectors or
selectors, okay? And we'll understand
how each service selects a pod. So, what
I'm going to do is I'm going to say
"kubectl" and I'm going to run a command
that is going to help me get the YAML
configuration for the service that we
are running. Yes. So, we have not
written YAML, but for whatever service
that is running, we can actually get the
YAML using a command. I'll just show
you. So, you'll say "get SVC" stands for
service "web". I'll say "-o"
and I'll say "YAML", okay? Like so. I'll
press enter.
And now here you are going to see So,
this is the entire YAML configuration,
and we have not defined this, but for
the service that we created, we got the
YAML. We can actually save this in .yaml
file as well, okay? But I'm not going to
do that. Here, you can see this selector
tag which says "app: web", okay? Now,
what this is going to do is this is
going to make sure that it selects all
the applications that have this
particular label.
Now, what is exactly a label, okay? What
is this term label that you're hearing
again and again? Label is just a key
value tag that is stuck on a pod.
And that is stuck on a pod to help
identify it because there might be
multiple apps running in a Kubernetes
cluster at any given point in time,
right? So, when when on the pod you're
going to have app is equal to
"web", okay? And this tells this tells
Kubernetes that this particular
application belongs to the web app, like
the application named web. Okay? That is
that is what it tells to Kubernetes.
Now, what does service actually do?
Okay, this was about pod. Now, what does
service actually do? So, you create a
service using this this this command.
So, you say cube CTL expose deployment,
okay? And then you say web, and then you
mention the type as node port. This is
what we did. And then you say
uh port is equal to 80. This is how you
expose the deployment and service was
created. Okay? Now, by running this
command, what you are do what Kubernetes
does it is it creates a service that
internally says selector will be app and
web. Okay? Which means uh
this means that
the service is supposed to send all the
traffic that it gets over here to all
the pods that have app is equal to web.
That are tagged with this label called
web. Okay? And that is that is how
things functions. And this is the
importance of labels and selectors in
Kubernetes. Okay? I hope this is making
sense. So, how traffic will flow is
whenever you head over to the browser
and if you try to access the service or
the application, okay? What will happen
is this traffic will go to the service
first. And then the service is
forwarding this particular traffic to
all the pods with the label web.
Okay? So, so that is how it works. And
this particular service is exposed on
this particular port on our local
machine using node port type. Okay? Now,
what I can do is I can remove
I can remove the label over here. So,
let me say let me remove the label.
Okay? So, I'll say cube CTL label pod.
Okay, we'll need the pod name. So, I'll
say cube CTL get pods. Okay? I would
also want to show you the labels
associated with this particular pod. So,
what I can do is I can say get pods and
I can add this option which is uh okay
show labels.
Okay. And you'll see these are the
labels. You can see app is equal to web.
This is a label that is assigned to this
particular pod. If you scale this
particular deployment, there will be
multiple pods and they all will have
this label because it belong to the same
deployment. Okay. Now, what I will do is
I'll try and get rid of this label.
Okay. So, here what I will do is
I'll say kubectl
and then label pod and I'll mention the
pod name. So, pod name is this one.
Okay. I'll mention this pod name and
I'll say app hyphen. Okay. So, this is
going to remove
app is equal to web label. Okay. And let
me
press enter. Okay. Uh so, you can see
unlabeled. And now let me show you the
label over here.
So, what exactly happened over here is
if you see, okay, so here
we remove the label. Right? You can see
this particular pod was unlabeled. Okay.
And this particular pod over here
is this one.
And you can see the label being removed
from here.
Right? The label is removed. But what
happened is
Kubernetes is trying to
match the declared state. And hence, if
we modify the label, okay, it started a
new pod with this particular label. You
can see over here. Okay. So, this is
Kubernetes trying to match the state
that has been declared by the developer.
Okay. So, if I unlabeled something, it
is already it already tried to uh match
and uh you know, it created a new
container with this particular label as
you can see over here. And this new pod
is actually running now. Okay. If I run
this again, you'll see now that we have
two pods. So, earlier we had only one
pod with this one label, but as soon as
I unlabeled this particular pod, we have
now one more pod with this label. And
now if I try to access it is still going
to
work. Okay. So here you know, Kubernetes
is trying to make sure that this app is
always running. But I've shown you how
labeling and unlabeling works. And now
what will happen is whenever you're
trying to access this application from
the browser, the service is sending the
traffic to this pod and not the old pod
because the old pod has been unlabeled.
I hope this has been useful.
Now let me show you some commands using
which you can debug the pods. And uh
debugging pods is one of the important
skills because in production you might
face some sort of issues, challenges,
and you might want to see the logs as to
what is happening. All right. So what
I'm going to do is I'm going to say cube
CTL get pods. Cube cuddle get pods. So I
have two pods right now that are
running. What you can do is you can say
cube CTL
logs and you can mention the pod name
over here. So I can copy this pod and I
can mention the pod name.
And you can see over here this is the
entire log of
all of this particular pod
over here.
You can see over here
uh like Docker is being initialized and
then it launched and then every whatever
happened over here. You can see all the
logs over here. All right. You can
access the logs. You can even execute
commands into the logs. Okay. So if I
want to log in to the container uh
sorry, log in to the pod and uh this
will open the shell inside the container
and I can run commands. So I can say
cube CTL exec {hyphen} IT. Oops. I'll
need the pod name over here. Okay. So
I'll say cube CTL
exec {hyphen} IT. Okay. So I'll I'll log
in an interactive mode. I'll mention the
pod name over here and I'll say SH like
so. Okay.
Uh oops. So it's okay.
So SH has a space over here. And now I'm
inside the container. Okay. And now I
can see LS and you can see over here
docker entry point docker entry point.sh
and then I have dev ETC folder. You can
see there there are a lot of other
folders like home, media, proc and a lot
of folders out there. I can see what is
my present directory. So I'm in the root
directory. I can see cat {hyphen} ETC
Oh, sorry, not {hyphen} {forward slash}
ETC nginx {slash} nginx
.conf. Okay. And you can see the nginx
file over here. Okay. This is the nginx
file.
Okay. Nginx configuration and I can see
exit over here. So I've exited the shell
over here. Okay. I can even describe the
pod. Okay. So I can see cube CTL
describe pod and I can mention the pod
name and you can see the entire pod
details over here. All the details like
what image this is using. Okay. It is
using nginx latest. Okay. Name, name
space. What is the priority of this pod?
What node it is running on? When it was
started? Everything. The IP of this
particular pod.
Can you see this?
Port, host port and where is it mounted?
You'll see a lot of things over here.
You can see all the events as well that
have happened with the uh
with the pod over here. Okay. So you can
see events, images it's running, IP of
the pod, uh container status and
everything. This is like one of the
important So these few commands that we
have seen are important to help you
debug pods and any sort of errors in
Kubernetes.
Hello everyone and now it's time that we
begin talking about how can you define
YAML configurations when it comes to
Kubernetes deployments. So what I'm
going to do is I am actually going to
run a command over here. Okay. So uh the
command I'm going to run is kubectl get
deployments. This is the name of the
deployment. I'll use this flag -o and
I'll mention YAML. Now, the moment I
press enter, I'm going to get this YAML
configuration over here printed.
Okay, and this is the configuration that
Kubernetes itself, like kubectl is
giving me.
And this is for my deployment that we
have created with the help of command.
Okay. Now, first question is what is
YAML?
Okay, so YAML is basically a
configuration language, you can say. And
the structure of the file is like this,
okay? You have like key-value pairs over
here. So, kind is deployment, metadata.
So, within metadata you have annotations
and
the annotations are these, okay?
So, creation timestamp is this. So, this
way the configuration is defined and you
would notice everything is key-value
pairs and there is indentation. So, here
these three things are not indented,
there are no spaces on the left-hand
side. And then here you have space, then
you here you have tab, like one tab
here, two tabs here, then again one tab
over here. So, this is how the file is
organized, okay? So, just for the them
who don't know this YAML
format, okay? I'm just giving you an
overview.
So, this is YAML and why Kubernetes uses
YAML because, you know, you cannot do
everything with the help of just
commands. You need some sort of
configuration that needs to be defined
so that you can define your desired
state as to how you want your app to be
deployed. For example, if you want three
replicas or three instances of your
application, you should have a file
where then you define all of that, like
the number of instances or the replicas
you need, and the image that you want to
make use of, and everything, like the
match label selector, everything. Okay,
here you can see images and all,
everything we have mentioned, okay?
Everything is mentioned. Available
replicas, all of this. Okay, so there
should be a file where you can
update this and you can even
apply the configuration using that
particular file, okay? And Kubernetes,
what it does is it looks at the file and
it tries to match the state that you've
mentioned in the file. So, that is the
significance of YAML file, okay? You can
generate the YAML file not only for
deployment, but you can also generate it
for service. So, for service you have to
say SVC. So, cube CTL get SVC web -o
YAML and you will get this for service.
Now, what you can do is, okay, here this
is auto generated for the deployments
and services that we have created so
far. This is auto generated and there
are a lot of unnecessary,
uh, you know, unnecessary values and
tags that have been mentioned since this
is auto created.
So, what I have done is I've taken these
two configurations and I've created two
separate files which one is for
deployment and other one is for service
and both the files you will find as an
attachment to this particular lecture,
uh, in the form of resources. So, feel
free to download those, uh, files and,
uh,
and here, as you can see, I've
downloaded both the files like app.yaml
and service.yaml, okay? What I'm going
to do is I'm going to copy these files,
okay? Just save it somewhere on your
local machine, unzip it and then,
uh, what you will do is come over to our
project, okay? This is our project here.
And now here in our project, uh, what we
can do is we can define a new folder.
So, I'll say k8s
and within this folder you can have like
another folder called demo, okay? And
within this demo folder we can paste
both these configurations over here,
okay? So, you can see these both are
YAML configurations and if you open
this, okay, you are going to see
uh, both the configurations, okay? Here,
this is app.yaml, so I'll just collapse
the sidebar so that we get a better
view. This is app.yaml, okay, which is
defining the deployment over here and
this is service.yaml, which is defining,
uh, the service, okay? So, what we can
do is we can go through both the files
and you will notice like I have done a
lot of clean up, okay? For example, here
uh there are a lot of uh you know
there are a lot of
lot of configuration that is actually
not needed. Like annotations is not
needed over here. So, I've just cleaned
that up. Okay, so this is a cleaned
version or a better version of the file
that you can see, okay? So, let us go
through the files, okay? First thing
I'll start with the uh deployment file,
which is app. yaml. Now, the first thing
that you see over here is the API
version. So, which this specifies which
Kubernetes API to use, okay? So, we have
mentioned apps/v1
and kind meaning kind defines the kind
of object that we are defining in this
YAML file for Kubernetes, okay? So, we
are not defining a pod or a service, we
are defining deployment. So, that is
what I've mentioned over here. Then, we
have specified under metadata we have
specified name and this is the name of
the deployment. So, you can name it
whatever you want to.
So, if you are uh deploying an
e-commerce application, you can name it
whatever you want the deployment name to
be. I've defined it as it as my app,
okay? Because something called as web we
have already created, okay? So, I'm
defining my app.
Then, you have some specs.
Now, spec under spec tag under spec over
here you are going to have all the
desired states as to uh what you want
Kubernetes to do, okay? So, here you are
mentioning replicas first, okay? So,
you're saying here that I want two pods
of this particular deployment or the app
that is there I'm deploying this uh
deployment to be there, okay? I'm
mentioning the selector over here, okay?
So, uh selector is basically
the selector is base selector basically
defines how deployment finds its pods,
okay? So, here we are defining the pods
with the labels my app. Okay? So, all
the labels with my app
all the pods with my app label will
belong to this particular deployment.
Okay? And then if you scroll down here,
you have template. Okay? Now, this is a
template as to how each pod should look.
Okay? And that is what we're defining
over here. And then here, we have the
spec again. And this is the spec for the
containers over here. So, this template
part is actually
like defining the pod structure. Okay?
Pod over here. So, metadata labels my
app meaning
this is the label that should be added
to every pod that is created. And then
under spec, you have containers over
here. Okay? So, this is a pod
specification. Here you are saying the
name should be my app. Okay? Image that
you should use for this particular
container is nginx. This is the Docker
image that you should run. And port,
which is the container port. Uh so, this
should be on port 80. Okay? So, app
inside the container listens on port 80.
So, that is what you have defined over
here. So, this is deployment structure
that you are defining. And then you have
the service structure. So, here what
you're doing is it's a similar
structure, but the configuration is for
service. So, here you can see the API
version again we have defined. This is
the core Kubernetes API that we are
mentioning. Kind, what is the kind of
the object? So, we are not creating
deployment now. Here we were creating
deployment, but now here we are creating
a service. This is the name of the
service here.
Then under spec, we have all the
specifications. So, here you can see
this is a selector. So, what does
service do? It exposes your pods, right?
It allows external traffic to come and
reach to your pod. So, we are saying
selector as app colon my app. So, what
this is going to do is it is going to
send all the traffic that have the label
as my app. Okay? This should be the
label. App is equal to my app. What is
the type of the service we are using? We
are using node port. And the ports that
we have mentioned over here, this is the
service port. Okay? This is where
clients talk. Okay? And then this is the
target port. So, this is where the
traffic is forwarded to the port within
the container. And this is the node
port. This is a fixed port opened on our
machine, on the host machine, on your
machine as a developer. So, you can
access this service using localhost 32
32000. 32000.
Okay? I hope this is making sense. Now,
once this is done, let us see how we can
apply this configuration and get the
deployment and service created in
Kubernetes. So, what I'm going to do is
I'm going to come over here in the
terminal. I'm going to make sure that
I've navigated to the K8S folder, which
is the folder where these both files are
defined. Okay? So, it's not defined in
K8S, but within K8S there is a demo
folder. Okay? So, I'm going to navigate
to demo here. And here I have both the
files. You can see app.app
.yaml and service.yaml.
What I'm going to do now is I'm first
going to apply or create the deployment
and then I'm going to apply the service.
Okay? So, I'm going to say cubes cuddle
over here, apply {hyphen} f and I'm
going to say app.yaml.
Something like this. And I'll press
enter. You can see this deployment was
created and I'll also apply service.
Service like this. Okay? So, you can see
service was also created. Now, if you
say cube CTL or cube cuddle get pods
over here, you're going to see the pod
over here. So, you can see two pods
running now with the name or the label
my app. Why my app? Because here you've
defined my app. You can see my app.
Right? The label is my app. Right? You
have defined that. And you can see that
running. You can also get SVC over over
which is the service. And you can see
over here. Uh this is what we had
defined for my app. You can see the port
it that is being exposed on a local
machine is 3200.
Now if you come over here, uh so this is
30241, which is something that we
created earlier on. So if I go to 3200,
you will see oh, it's 32000.
So if you enter that, you're going to be
able to access Engine X
welcome page. And this is because this
is how it's operating.
Now here you might have noticed I
applied deployment first and then
services, okay? So this is the order in
which generally things work. So you
first create the deployments.
Deployments are created first and then
services because to route traffic,
service job is to route traffic to
deployments, right? So to route traffic,
pods must exist, and pods are created
with the help of deployments in
Kubernetes. Okay? Now this is done. We
have everything set up, and you can even
access it from the uh from this
particular page, okay? Uh now one thing
I would like to clear over here, like if
you come to the configuration, okay?
I've seen beginners get confused between
three these three ports, okay? Why are
we defining like these three ports? So
within ports uh like this port tag,
okay? Here you have mentioned the
selector, which is fine. You want this
service to be associated with all uh the
labels all the pods that have these
labels, okay? You've defined the type of
the service, which is node port. This is
clear.
But generally people get confused for
this ports thing over here. So we have
port, we have target port, and we have
node port, okay? So let me clear out
over here. Port meaning, okay? Port is
the service port.
So 80 over here, this is the service
port, which means like there is a
service that is created inside
Kubernetes, right? So whenever traffic
comes to the Kubernetes service, okay?
It hits this particular port of the
service, and what service is going to do
is it is going to forward the traffic
from this port to internal ports, okay?
Target port is 80. So, this is the port
of the container.
Okay? So, traffic from service port 80
is forwarded to
the container port 80.
Over here. This is the container port.
And then node port is the port that is
exposed on your local machine, 3200
zero. Okay? 32000 three times. Okay? So,
this you can change, okay? Depending on
your preference, okay? Here, target
port, this is a container port, so
engine x by default runs on this port,
so that is why we have this mentioned
over here. And service port we have
mentioned as 80. So,
traffic first hits service,
then from 80 it is forwarded to
container port 80, okay? And it comes
from here. This is our local machine.
So, this is one sort of uh you know,
clarification I wish to provide, okay?
Now, our app is running. Now, what we
can do is we can even delete delete the
uh service and deployment. So, what I
will do is uh we have it up and running.
I'll say cube cuddle, okay? Delete
{hyphen} f, and I'll say service. So,
I'll delete the service first because I
want to cut off the traffic first, and
then I'll delete the deployment, which
will in turn delete the pods. So, I'll
say delete this. So, you can see over
here, this is deleted, and then over
here I'm going to say app.yml. So, this
is also deleted over here, okay? Now, if
you try to get the service, you won't
find that service, and you won't even
find the pods over here. You can see
services and pods both are gone. And
now, if you refresh this, this won't
work. You'll get page not found or site
cannot be reached, okay? So, this is
gone. So, this is how you can uh
actually uh you know,
make use of configuration. So, here I
have two sort of configuration. One is
for deployment, and other one
is for service. Also, rather than
running two different commands, you can
combine both the commands into one. So,
what you can do is instead of saying
apply two times, what I can say is apply
app.yaml and then I'll say app
service.yaml over here in single
configuration. And you can see both are
created in a single, you know, single
command. Okay? And you can delete both
as well. Okay? Delete
-f and I'll say service.yaml.
Something like this. You can see both
are deleted. Okay? So, this is how
you can make use of files. And if you
want all the configurations that exist
in a particular folder to apply, what
you can do is you can say kubectl
apply
-f and you can press dot. So, in the
current folder, whatever YAML files are
there, they all will get applied. So,
let's say you have a lot of YAML files
and you want to apply or create the
objects for all of them, you can
directly say dot. Okay? And if you want
to delete,
you can simply say delete like this. So,
these are all different variants of
the commands, okay, that you can make
use of. Okay? Now, what we've done is we
have created two separate files over
here. Okay? Two separate files. Now,
what I can do over here is I can create
a third file, okay, and I can have both
these files combined into one file.
Okay? So, I can
I'll create a folder over here. Okay?
I'll say separate. Okay? Something like
this. And I'll move both these files
over I'll just move service.yaml over
here. Okay? Like so.
Okay? And app.yaml I'll get get it
copied over here. So, app.yaml and
service.yaml have moved to separate.
Okay? Because here we have both the
separate files. And now, what I can do
is I'll take the service.yaml, okay, and
I'll combine it with app.yaml. So, I'll
come over here and in the bottom, okay,
I'll mention a syntax. Now, what is the
syntax that I need to mention? I need to
mention a document separator. So, here
you need to mention three dots.
Okay? Enter.
And then you need to paste everything
else. So, you can see over here.
Okay?
You can see over here. This is the
service definition, and this is the
deployment definition. So, both
deployment and service now belong to a
single file. Okay, so if you don't want
to have multiple files, of course you
can have multiple files have things
segregated, but this is also an approach
that you will see commonly being used.
Okay? If the files are smaller, people
generally prefer combining them rather
than having two separate files. Okay?
So, how I've organized my folder
structure, just to give you a gist, I've
created under demo I've created separate
folder.
I've added the config I've moved the
configurations that we created
initially.
And here in the demo folder now, I have
one file which is app.yaml which has
both deployment and service over here.
And they both are separated using this
document separator. And document
separator tells Kubernetes that there
this is one YAML file one configuration
file, but multiple objects are there
like multiple objects configuration. So,
this is like a
you can say this is like a divider that
is being created. Okay? Now, what you
can do is here, okay, I had deleted both
of them. Okay? So, I'll just clear out
everything. Now, I can simply apply.
Okay? And I'll say app. yaml like so.
Both has deployment and service now
app.yaml, right? So, I've applied both.
And now if I come here and access, you
can see 3200 is available to access.
Right? So, this is how things work, and
I can say cube
cuttle get pods. You can get SVC, which
is the services, and you can see how
things are working fine. Right? And if
you wish to delete, okay, you can just
run a single command and delete things
as well. Okay? So, instead of deleting
like applying this way, you can say
delete like so.
Okay? So, deployment is also deleted and
pods is also deleted. You can see
get SVC, there is nothing. And if you
refresh this, this is not going to work.
Okay? So, this is how things function.
Okay? When you can when you work with
files, okay? And generally having files
is one of the
approaches that developers often use.
Why? Because this allows them to define
the desired state that they wish to see
in Kubernetes for their applications.
And Kubernetes takes these
configurations and it works on it and
tries to make sure that the state in
Kubernetes matches the state that you
have defined as a developer. Okay? So,
yes, I hope this has been helpful. And I
hope you all have been able to follow
along.
So, now's the time that we begin talking
about the environmental variables or
environment variables that our
containers would need within Kubernetes
pods. All right? So, here I have the
deployment defined. Okay? Let's say this
particular container, which is running
the image of Nginx, needs a few
environment variables. Like, for
example, I can define environment
variables like app message and DB
password, let's say, hypothetically.
Okay?
And this is a common scenario wherein,
you know, you will have applications
that are dependent on environment
variables. So, how are you going to pass
those over here? Okay? So, let me show
that to you. So, here you have defined
the container configuration. So, here
you are going to come in
and just under the image, I am going to
say env over here. And here I'm going to
say name.
Okay? And you can see there is a
brilliant auto suggest from Visual
Studio Code. Okay? I've added this and
again, I'll add one more
uh one more uh environment variable.
Okay? So, this is the name of the
variable. I'll say app message over
here. And the value for this is hello.
Uh hello from
app.yaml,
something like this, okay? And here,
this is the another
uh, another environment variable, so
this will be DB _ password, something
like this. And I can add the DB password
as this. Okay?
And okay.
So, one second. I pasted this, and you
can see base64, okay, so I got the auto
suggest as well. This is the base64
value for
the word password, as you can see over
here. Okay? Interesting. Visual Studio
Code is smart, okay? So, you can save a
lot of time using these auto completes.
So, what am I doing? I am within this
container. So, this is deployment, first
of all. This is a deployment object.
Here, you're defining the specification
for containers, and here you have
mentioned ENB, so ENV. And this is a key
and the value, key and the value. So,
this way you're passing in environment
variables into the containers, right?
Now, here you'll see this dot, okay?
This white dot, which means that the
file is not saved, so I'll save this
file. Come over here, and I'll clear
everything out, okay? And I'll make sure
that I apply this file, okay? So, I'm
going to apply this file again.
See, whenever you make any sort of
changes in the configuration, you have
to make sure you apply the file, and
that is when the configuration gets
updated. Okay, so I'll apply this, and
you can see deployment is created and
service is also created. Okay? Now, what
we can do is we can actually, uh, I can
actually log in inside the container. Of
course, this is an Engine X
image that the container is using. Now,
that actually does not require these
environment variables that we have set.
What I'm going to do is I'm going to log
into the container, and I'm going to
show you that these variables are
accessible from within the container.
So, if your application needs
environment variables, you would know
that it would be passed this way, okay?
So, what I will do is I'll come over
here. I'll say cube CTL get pods.
You have these pods over here, which is
my app. I'm going to copy the pod name,
and I'm going to say cube cuddle e x e c
in the interactive mode. I'm going to
pass in the pod name, and I'm going to
mention over here sh like this. Now, I'm
logged in to this particular pod, and
I'm going to say print e n v. This is a
command, and I'm going to say grep d b
underscore password.
Okay?
So, this is the command that I'm
running, and d b underscore password is
the name of the environment variable
that I want to check. And you can see
there's a value that is set over here. I
can even check it for
uh print e n v, and I can check it for
app underscore message.
So, you will see both the values being
passed inside the container. Okay? And
this can be consumed by the application
that is running inside the container,
and this is actually how you pass in
environment variables inside a container
that is running. Okay? Now, once this is
done.
Okay? This is how you pass in the
environment variable, but the problem
with this approach is, you know, you are
hard coding the values inside deployment
files, right? And this might this is not
a
uh smart strategy, you know, because
these files will be committed to version
control system, and it's not a good
strategy.
What Kubernetes does is it basically
provides separate components.
And uh these components are called as
config map and secrets. So, these both
are components that are provided by
Kubernetes. Like we have components of
deployment, we have a component called
service, right? We have component called
config map and secret. Now, when do you
use what? And what is config map and
secret? So, config map is a way in which
you can store your application
configuration,
and uh these configurations are
non-sensitive. So, all the non-sensitive
configuration goes into config map,
and all the sensitive configuration like
database passwords, tokens goes into
secret. Secret is also a object that is
provided to us. Okay? So, for example,
just to give you an example, if you have
configuration like uh you know, which
environment you are on, the logging
levels, the name of the application,
all of that can go and sit into config
map. If you have feature flags, API base
URLs, all of that can go into config
map. And in secrets, you will have
sensitive data like database passwords,
API token, JWT secrets, all of this will
go into secret. Okay? And secrets must
be base 64 encoded. That is one uh
one because secret stores sensitive
data, okay? The Now, there there has to
be some sort of encoding that will be
added and secrets has this property
wherein all the data or all the values
that you are storing has to be base 64
encoded. Okay? Now, what I would
recommend is we are going to create two
files over here. Okay? In this in this
folder, demo folder. One is for config
map and one is for secret. And what I
would recommend is you all head over uh
to the resources section or the
attachments of this particular video and
download two files that you see.
Now, the files that you will see, I have
already downloaded. So, this is
config.yaml and the another one is
secret.yaml. These are the two files
that you will get.
So, I'll copy this, okay? And I'll come
over here in my application folder and
under demo folder, where app.yaml
resides, I'll just paste both these
files, which is config.yaml and
secret.yaml. I'll also open both of
them. Okay? So, let us talk about
config.yaml. Now, what is config.yaml?
Config.yaml is a config map over here.
It is a object of type config map. We
are making use of API version over here.
The kind is config map as you can see.
Okay? Now, you have metadata over here.
So,
under metadata, you have name wherein
you're defining the name of the config
map, right? And this is how we are going
to reference it.
Right? This is how we are going to
reference it. Then you have data, and
this data
will define the key-value pair that will
actually become a ENV environment
variable. Okay? So, you have app
message, and this is the value, and you
can have more of these, right? Right
now, I have only one I've defined only
one. You can have more of these. And
similar is the structure for that of
secret over here, as you can see. Okay?
So, this is again making use of API
version. The kind is secret. This is the
object type. Metadata basically defines
the name of the secret, and this is the
type. Right? So, this is a generic
secret type, opaque. And then I have
data, and this is the data that will be
going in as the environment variable.
And like I said, secret is used to store
sensitive stuff, and that is why we have
database password over here. Okay? And
config.yaml has generic stuff that your
application is going to need. Okay? Now,
what you can do is we can actually make
use of uh
these into our application. And how
would you do that? Okay? So, I will come
over here.
I'll
keep this commented, something like
this. Okay?
And here I'm going to say uh I'm going
to define Okay, not here.
But let me come here.
Okay? I'll say ENV again. Okay? Oops.
And you can see over here I got some
nice auto suggest. Okay? So, I'm going
to say ENV, and here Okay, here you can
see name app message. Okay, let me press
tab, and then I can modify this. Okay?
So, I have ENV, name is app message. So,
see, here also we used ENV, name was app
message.
And then here, value was hello from
app.yaml. Okay? So, here instead of
value, you have to write value from
because you want to refer to the config
map.
Right? So, see here, we were not making
use of config map, so we had directly
used name key and value key. But, here
we are going to use name key,
but the value key we have to use value
from. Okay? And you have to mention
config map
key ref, and here you have to mention
app config, and the key is app message.
Okay? So, here what is app config over
here? App config is the name of the
config or or the config map that you are
creating. Okay? These two should match.
And the name of the key is app message.
So, name of the key is app message over
here. Okay? And uh that is that is what
is going to happen. Okay? So, what will
happen is during run time,
this value will
come and it will be passed as app
message over here inside the container.
This is done. Then, for DB password, you
do the same. DB password value from
secret key ref. Okay? So, here you use
config map key ref, but here since you
are referring to the secret Okay? Secret
is the component where this value is
coming from, you have to make use of
secret key ref.
Name is DB secret, and key is DB
password over here. I hope this is
making sense, this syntax. Okay?
Earlier, we were not making use of
config maps and secret, so we had
everything hardcoded like this, name and
value. But, now since we are making use
of config map and secret, okay? The
syntax changed a little bit, and I have
I've I've not deleted this, I've
commented it for the same purpose so
that you can compare this. Okay? So,
you're using value from in both the
places. Here, if you're making use of
config map, you have to make use of
config map key ref. And here, secret key
ref.
Right? And then you mention the name of
the config map
and the key that you want to refer, and
here name of the secret and the key you
want to refer. That's the only
uh that's the only change uh that is
needed. Okay? And then, what you have to
do is you have to save this. So, just be
sure to press Ctrl S because Visual
Studio Code does not save everything
automatically, right? Then, come over
here.
Okay, and just say oops. So, I'll I'll
have to exit this, unfortunately. I'll
exit this. And just say over here,
apply. Okay, you can see
deployment.apps/myapp
has been configured, but the service is
unchanged. Okay? So, basically it has
only taken changes into consideration.
It knows that you changed the
environment variables over here that
you're passing. And services were not
changed. The services were not changed,
and only the deployment was configured
over here. Okay? Now, what you can do is
here we'll
we'll go inside the pod again. Okay, we
can get the pod. And actually
Okay, we have the pod up and running. We
can get inside the pod over here. Okay,
this is the pod. I'll log in. And here
I'm going to say print env.
And I'll say grep app_message
like so. Okay? You can see Okay, it's
still picking up the value from app.yaml
over here.
Okay, can anyone tell me what the issue
is? Okay, I've got the issue. Uh and I'm
not going to edit this. I'm going
actually going to debug this live so
that you know you learn things from
this. Okay? See, I'll I'll tell you if
you're not able to get what we did over
here is we are trying to access the old
container. So, this is the old
container. Okay, in R7. You can see
early on we ended our seven. This is the
old container where we had set the value
hardcoded. Okay, and you got the value
like this, old container.
Now, what happened is you
you updated the deployment. Okay? And
what happened? What Kubernetes did is it
basically updated the deployment, and it
started creating new pods. Why it
started creating new pods? Because the
environment variables are set when the
pod starts.
So, it started creating new pods, but
the new pods that it tried to create
failed. I'll also tell you why it
failed. So, here you can see this is the
new pod that it tried creating. You can
see create container config error.
Okay. Why it failed?
Because we have not created config map
and secret. And the new container that
it tried creating with the updated
configuration that we are referring over
here does not exist because we have not
created config map and secret yet. So,
the solution to this is we need to first
create config map and secret over here.
So, I'll say apply.
I'll say config
.yaml like so. And I'll also say
secret.yaml like so. Both have to be
applied, okay? And then I need to say
apply {hyphen} f app.yaml, okay? So,
what happened here is initially it was
not able to find the config map and
secret. And that is why this new
container did not start. See, there is a
rolling update that happens in
Kubernetes, right? Unless and until the
old pods are life, the Sorry, unless and
until new pods are
running, the old pods are not destroyed.
So, this new pod did not start. It
failed because it could not find the
config map and secret that you're
referring to in deployment because they
were not created, right? And that is why
the old pods were still running and you
were actually logging into old pod and
trying to access the data. And of
course, in old pod you're going to get
the old data only, the old environment
variable that you had set. So, that was
a problem, okay? So, two problems. One,
we were trying to access the old pod.
And the second problem was this
container did not start. Why? Because
config map and secret were not created,
okay? Some bit of learning over here,
right? So, here
uh you can apply like this, okay?
And I'm going to say enter here, okay?
So, okay, let me check the pods now.
Let me get the pods. Okay, I think after
updating the configuration and after
creating
uh the uh
the config map and secret, the rollout
has been successful. So, you can see
over here, these are the pods. What I
will do is I'll copy the pod name, any
of the pod name you can copy, starting
with my app. Why my app? Because web is
our old deployment, okay? My app is the
deployment and the pods that we have
created using this configuration, right?
We have mentioned over here, my app.
Right? My app. My app. So, you have to
make use of my app, and I'll copy this
over here.
And I'm going to say
uh execute IT, and I'll update the pod
names. You can see the old pods have
been removed now, okay? And here I'm
going to say print ENV, okay? Like this.
And uh I'll say grep.
I'll say app_message.
This should ideally show the new
message. You can see, "Hello from
Kubernetes config map." And you can
even, oops, you can even see
the
app secret. Grep
app_
uh DB_password. That is the name,
DB_password,
like so. And you should see the DB
password. Okay, you can see this was
base64 encoded, but you can actually
read it, okay? So, there is a joke in
Kubernetes that secrets are actually not
secret, because, you know, you can read
it this way, okay? But that is how
things work. Of course, there are
different strategies as to how you can
make a secret uh secure in Kubernetes,
okay? You uh you have to externalize it
even further. But for now, this is we we
are learning about secret, and I also
want to highlight that secrets in
Kubernetes are actually not secrets, and
everybody can see it, okay? That is one
uh you know, meme that everybody shares
uh because here you can actually read
your password. This is base64 encoded,
right? So, this is uh how things work,
okay? And if you want uh what you can do
is you can also check the config map
that has been created and the secrets
that have been created. So, you can say
over here
uh exit first of all because you're
inside the container. Now, you can say
cube cuddle and get config
map and I can say app hyphen config,
something like this. So, you will get
this app config. You can see over here,
okay? This is your app config.
And a similar command for secret as
well. So, here you can say instead of
get
config map, you can say get secret and
here you will mention the name of
secret. See, the name you're mentioning
over here like app config and DB secret,
these are all you have defined you
yourself have defined, right? So, here
you can see metadata name is app config
and secret is DB secret. Right? You can
change the name depending on the
scenario for you. So, you can see these
both are created. So, earlier these were
not created and that is why it was not
working. But yes, this is how you pass
in environment variables using config
map and secrets in Kubernetes and I hope
this has been useful.
All right. So, now it's challenge time
and it's time
where you step out of this watching mode
and get into doing mode. Okay? The goal
of this challenge is basically to make
sure uh you go hands-on with Kubernetes
and it's it's going to be a simple
challenge, okay? Based on everything
that we've covered so far.
So, here
uh what I'm going to do is come over to
Embark X official uh
repository, okay? So, here you can come
to Embark X official repository or your
own uh repository as well, okay? So,
hub.docker.com/u/embarkx.
This is the official one and here you
will find three images, okay? Three
images that uh are basically Oops, so
what happened? That are basically
for uh
hello for displaying hello world. Okay,
they are simple containers that display
hello world and they expect one
environment variable that you can pass
it. All right, so these are the three uh
three containers I would say, three uh
images that exist, not containers,
sorry. Three images that exist on Docker
Hub and you can pick anyone, okay? These
three are written in different
programming languages. Okay, but they
operate the same way. Okay, environment
variables needed are also same. So, you
can pick up node or Python, it does not
matter, all right? Because you're going
to pull the image and use it uh within
the Kubernetes configuration, right? So,
either you can you make use of this
official one or you can come over here,
you might have if you're following this
entire tutorial, you might have also set
up your own uh repository, right? Like I
have mine and you might have uh you
know, these uh
these uh what do we call it?
These images pushed to Docker Hub,
right? So, you can either use your own
or if you
if you don't have your own and you
prefer using mine, you can. Okay, these
are the official ones. And you can get
the details on of the official one if
you click on this, you can see this is
Node.js demo, okay? This image runs a
uh Node.js hello application, okay?
These These are the ports and uh you can
see over here the environment variable
that it needs, okay? And this is what
you pass in. You can even configure the
port. So, these two things you can pass
in from uh when running the containers.
Okay? So, this is what you can do, okay?
You can even make use of Spring if you
are into Spring Boot. Okay? So, you can
make use of this as well.
Now, all the details have been shared
already, okay? You'll find all of this
over here. Okay? And uh you also have
the templates defined uh for deployment,
service
config map and secret as well, you know?
So, these These are just the files,
okay? What you can do is you can
replicate these files update the
configuration. So, here uh for example,
in deployment, we are making use of
Engine-X image. Here, we won't be making
use of Engine-X. If you are willing to
make use of Hello Spring. So, if you are
willing to run this within Kubernetes,
okay, you are not going to uh use
Engine-X image, but you're going to
replace that image over here, the image
URL over here, right? So, the template
is with you, okay? You know how to refer
to the environment variables, okay? Uh
so, I will leave it over to you, okay?
What you do is pause the video right
now, attempt this challenge sincerely by
yourself. See how it goes. See, the goal
of this challenge is not to get the
right answers here, right? Uh even if
you are not able to, that's completely
fine. If you get errors, that's
absolutely okay. The goal is basically
to get you go hands-on, because when you
start going hands-on, only then you
start learning things and you start uh
stepping out of your comfort zone, and
that is when you become a good
developer.
Right? So, I want you all to do that.
And uh pause the video right now, and
I'll be solving this, I'll be deploying
this myself, and I'll be showing you how
you can. And if you pause the video
right now, attempt it yourself, and then
you can play the video and watch my
solution and compare it with yours.
Remember, getting the right answer is
not the goal here, but
trying out is the goal. So, pause the
video.
I hope Welcome back. I hope you all had
a chance to attempt this. Okay, what I'm
going to do with now is
I'll come over here, and I have this
folder called K8S {slash} demo.
Here, I'm going to add a new folder. I'm
going to say hello
app, something like this, okay? This is
the hello app, okay? Or I can say app
one {hyphen} hello, okay? Let me rename
it that way. App one {hyphen} hello,
okay? And what I'm going to do is I'm
going to copy app.yaml config and secret
that I had created previously into this
particular folder here, okay?
And I'll close
all from the editor, okay? So, I have
all the files now open over here, right?
I can make use of these. Right, so what
I will do is first of all, okay, I I
won't go directly with config map and
all. Okay, I'll just comment to the
config map. We'll go step-by-step.
Config map is commented. I'll try to
make use of ENV directly over here.
So, I'll
uncomment this over here, right? And
here instead of uh
app message
okay, instead of app message what we
need is we need ENV value. ENV
_value. Why ENV value?
Because
the container over here, okay, the
container expects ENV _value. So, that
is what we need to mention, ENV _value.
And here I'm saying hello from app.yaml,
okay? You can have DB password as well,
that's absolutely okay. Okay, but this
is not going to be used by the app
because app does not need it. Okay, this
everything is fine. Replicas we have
mentioned two. You can like have just
one replica over here. Okay? And here
instead of my app, I'm going to say
app one {hyphen} hello.
Okay, this is okay.
And I'll update this as well to app one
hello. I'll update this as well to app
one hello. Everything is updated to app
one hello. If you scroll down
this should also be updated to app one
hello and app one hello, okay? I'm
basically updating everything, okay?
And uh I don't think anything else is
needed. Okay, so deployment is there,
app one hello.
Okay?
We have app one hello. All right, image
needs to be updated. So, image over here
will be the image that is here, right?
So, I'll come over here.
Tags and I can get the latest image.
This is the latest image. Okay? What I
can do is a mark X
{slash} hello-spring {colon} latest.
I'll get this one, right? Uh you can get
any version, so I'll just add this.
Okay, image is added. And uh, here
container port is 80. Okay, the
container port won't be 80. I'll tell
you why. Because this is a Spring Boot
application and as per the docs, as per
the docs over here, if you go to
overview, this application is running on
8080, port 8080. You can see.
Right? This application is running on
port 8080. So, this Nginx was running on
port 80 and that is why you had this
port 80 added over here. But here, what
we need to do is I'll say container port
should be 8080. I'll scroll down to the
service over here.
Okay.
So, somewhere over here. Okay. Here,
instead of port 80, I'll have 8080, like
so.
And this thing will also become 8080.
Oops.
And we can let this be 3200.
Okay, make sure there is nothing mapped
to this particular port. All right, I
think uh, this is it. I don't think we
need anything else. We have not created
config map yet. What I'm doing is I'm
hardcoding the ENV value like this in
the deployment and the service file.
Right? Now, what I will do is I'll come
over here. Okay, and make sure I'm in
the right directory. So, first I'll go
one level up. I'll say PWD. I'm in K8S.
So, I'll switch over to the directory
where I've created the configuration.
So, this is my configuration, app .yaml.
Okay, I'll say kubectl
uh, kubectl apply {hyphen}f app.yaml,
like so. I'll get this applied. So, you
can see the service is also created and
the deployment is also created. Now,
what I can do is I can try and get the
pods over here. So, you can see this pod
is running. Okay, and I can come over
here and here, earlier on this
particular port, there was Nginx
running. I can refresh this and now you
can see here we have this Hello Spring
Boot app running. Right? We we did not
change the port actually. We just
switched the image and the environment
variables. The configuration mostly
remained the same. We just changed the
selectors and the name of the
application that we wanted to have.
Okay, name of the So here if you come,
okay, we have updated all these names
over here to app one dot hello. Name of
the deployment, the selectors, okay, the
containers over here, the container
labels, everything we have updated.
Service and the selector in service,
everything we have updated to app one
hello because we wanted it to reflect,
okay? So this is you can see the
container is this one, right? And you
can see over here simple app Springboot
is running. ENV hello from app.yaml.
Where is this coming in from? This is of
course coming in from app.yaml.
Here.
You'll also be able to access DB
password if you log in to the container.
You know how to do that, right? So this
is actually done, okay? And we did this
without creating config map. What I can
What I can now do is I can also add
config map over here, okay? Now config
map instead of having app I I can have
like name as app config, okay? And here
I can say hello from Kubernetes config
map. You can modify this okay, if you
wish to, but I'll keep the same.
Come over here and I will comment this
entire thing, okay? Oops, sorry. I'll
comment this entire thing and I'll
uncomment this entire thing here.
Uncomment. Okay? And what I'm going to
do is I'm going to say app message.
Okay, so this won't be app message.
Container needs ENV value. ENV_VALUE is
the name of the variable. So I'll add
that.
Okay? So this is the
value that gets passed, okay? Then over
here you have config map key ref. So
here inside config map this config map
the config name is app_message. Right?
App_message. So that is what we are
referring to, okay? This is coming in
from secret. So secret also we need need
to define, but secret we won't change.
I'll I'll just keep the same file. You
can modify if you wish to. You can
change the name of the secret if you
wish to. Okay? If you add hello DB
secret, you can add that. That's
completely fine. And here you can say
hello DB password, something like that.
Okay? And here also you can say hello
app message.
Hello {underscore} app message. And here
also you can say hello {underscore}. So,
if you update this, okay? If you update
this, you come over here. And here
instead of
you you have to say hello {underscore}
Oops, hello {underscore} app message.
Like so.
Okay? And this also will be hello. And
this also will be hello everywhere.
Right? All these things will be there.
Make sure you save everything.
Right? What we have done is
we have now
commented out the ENV, like the ENV
values that we had hardcoded in our
deployment and service file, and we have
we are referring now to an external
config map and secret.
Right? Finally, if you run the app,
okay? Instead of uh seeing the current
message that you're seeing over here,
which is hello from app.yaml, you should
be able to see hello from Kubernetes
config map in the API. Okay? Now, this
is done. What I will do is I'll quickly
apply the changes. And to apply
I need to also create the config map. I
also need to create the secret. I also
need to create the
uh deployment, right? Because deployment
has changed. So, what I will do is I
have all the files in the same folder,
so I'll say dot over here.
It'll apply all the files. You can see.
So, this configured
service is unchanged.
Config is created, and
the secret is also created. Okay? All of
this is created. And if you try to get
the pods, you will have the pods
running. You can come over here, and if
you refresh now you can see okay?
Can you see this ENV hello from
Kubernetes config map and hello, this is
the application.
Right?
So, yes, this is the challenge. This was
the challenge. I hope you were able to
do it successfully. It's pretty simple
based on the knowledge that we have
gained so far. We've just tried to
replicate the steps to the application,
other application that exist where in we
have to actually pass the ENV variables
so that you understand how ENV variables
are passed actually. So, here, remember,
this container needs ENV variable
as What is the name of the ENV variable?
Here, if you scroll down, this ENV score
name of the variable.
So, you have to make sure you mention
ENV value here in the name because this
is how it's being passed to the
container. And how this
variable gets the value, it's getting in
from the config map like so. You're
referring to this config map and you're
getting this key.
Okay? So, from this config map, you're
getting this key. That is how it works.
Right? I hope this is making sense. I
don't think uh
anything else is needed. Secret here.
Yeah. So, everything else is working.
Now, if you want, okay, you can also try
this out with other images. So, you can
come over here.
Go to embark x. Okay, we tried spring
one. You can go to node.js if you wish
to. You can just experiment with things,
you know? So, in node, you can even pass
in ENV value and port.
So, you can do that. Okay? You can pass
in ENV value and port. If you don't pass
port, there is a default port that
exist. Right? You can see default is
3,000. So, all the documentation is
given over here. You can even refer to
uh you know, Python one. You can run the
Python one in the same way. You can see
over here.
Okay? It also needs ENV value and port.
Port, if you don't pass, the default is
3,000. Okay? And ENV value, you have to
pass the same way you pass it for this
container. Pretty Pretty simple. It is
This is not language dependent.
Whichever container you want to run in
whichever programming language you have
written, that's completely fine. You can
run that. Okay? Just that you're running
inside Kubernetes. These are images that
you're pulling locally. Like Kubernetes
pulls this image locally and it runs it
on your machine because you have
Kubernetes configured onto your machine.
If you configure or if you're
interacting with Kubernetes in cloud,
this is going to run in cloud. Right
now, with the help of Kubectl,
where are we interacting? Kubectl is a
tool that is helping us interact with
Kubernetes clusters, right? So, where
are we interacting? We're interacting
with our local cluster on our machine,
right?
Down the line, when we go to cloud,
okay, we can make sure that Kubectl
points to the cloud. Right? And at that
point in time, you will have all this
running in the cloud. Isn't this
amazing? Right? So, to update the
images, you will have to update the
image like this over here. You can even
update the tag. You can update the name,
if you wish to, but name, I think it's
fine. You just update the image
and you just make sure you're passing in
the right ENV variable. That's it. And
the containers should run fine.
I hope this has been useful.
Hello and welcome. And now it's time for
another challenge. And this challenge is
going to be a little bit challenging
one, but we are going to have full-on
fun doing this. So, what we are going to
do is, so far we have deployed monolith
application into Kubernetes cluster.
What we are going to do is, we are now
going to take a look at how you can
deploy microservices onto Kubernetes
cluster. So, here if you come to our
official
Docker Hub page of EmbarkX,
you're going to find these two services,
which is tax service A and tax service
B. These are the two services that run
in microservices architecture and one
service is responsible for providing the
tax values and other service is
responsible for calculating the final
amount based on the country and amount
that is being passed.
So, here you can see the complete
diagram of how this entire thing works,
okay? Of course, there is a front-end as
well, okay, but let's not look at front
end right now. We're going to deploy
these two back end services and we are
going to like do a
API call to get the tax calculation. So
here, price service, which is service A,
it accepts amount and country country
code. How does it accept? It accepts
through the URL like this over here. And
it returns the final price based on the
tax in the country. Now, where does it
gets the tax amount from? It gets tax
amount from the service B. So it calls
service B. It passes the country code
and it gets the tax amount from tax
service. And tax service over here,
service B, returns the tax based on the
country and accepts the country code
over here. Okay, this is how this is the
format in which the API call is supposed
to be done. Right? It accepts it over
here and price is price service, which
is service A, is going to display the
total amount based on the country and
the amount that you have passed. So we
are going to work on this and here in
the official image, you're going to find
a lot of information over here. Okay?
So you can see over here, it accepts the
price and country code like this.
Okay? And
here, if you scroll down, you'll see it
accepts tax service URL as well. So you
need to pass in tax service URL and the
port. Okay? So this is how it's going to
function. And then you have tax service
B as well. Oops, I pressed back
accidentally. So tax service B, if you
go over here
and if you open Oops. So if you open
this in new tab, okay?
So here you are going to see this is
also
the service that returns the tax amount.
Okay? So this is the
sample JSON and these are the country
codes available. And here you can see
Where is the ENV? Okay, this is the ENV
variable that you can pass in if you
wish to. All right? So that is this is
what
this is what we need to deploy to
Kubernetes cluster and of course they
are going to communicate amongst
themselves. So, what I would recommend
is, okay, you'll have the format. If you
come over here, you'll have the format
for service and deployment. Okay? Don't
bother about creating config map or
secret right now. Okay, I'll just close
this. Just create deployment and service
for this. Okay, there will be two
deployments and two services. So, two
app.yaml files is what you're going to
need. One for service A and other one
for service B. You need to pass in the
right environment variables. Okay, and
you need to make sure you use the right
image name.
So, you can either use my image from the
official repository of embarkex, or what
you can do is
you might also have this same if you
have the same app push to your
repository as well, you can get the data
get the image from there as well. Okay?
So, it's totally it's totally your
choice. Okay, from where you get the
official repositories are also there,
and you can even use yours. So, what I
would recommend is pause the video. Of
course, this is going to be a little bit
challenging,
but you know, we need to get out of our
comfort zones, and we need to
start writing code. Okay? You fail, you
get errors, only then you learn. Okay?
Of course, you can play the video and
watch me solve this particular challenge
as well. Okay, but I want you all to at
least give an attempt. Getting the right
answers, like I've always said, getting
the right answers is not the goal over
here. I This is not an exam, right? I
want you all to at least attempt,
because that is when you start from you
start going from watching mode to doing
mode, and you start doing things
actually. All right? So, pause the video
right now and attempt this.
Welcome back. I hope you all got a
chance to attempt this challenge. What
I'm going to do is I'm going to do a
little bit of organization over here
first before I create any sort of files.
So, here I'm going to create under K8S,
I'm going to create a folder. I'm going
to say app two,
and I'm going to say tax over here,
okay? Or let me see how I've named this
in Docker. It's tax calculator, tax
hyphen calculator. So, I'm going to
rename this. tax
hyphen calculator. You can rename it You
can name it whatever you want to, but
I'm just following the conventions,
okay?
And then I'm going to have another
folder. So, I'm going to say service
hyphen A over here. And then one more
folder, which is service hyphen B.
Okay? So, all the YAML files for service
A and service B will be in their
respective respective folders.
Right? Now, what I'm going to do is I'm
going to have uh
app.yaml copied, okay?
So, I'll uh
copy the app.yaml from here.
Okay? And uh I'll paste it in service A
first and then in service B, okay?
I'll
close this one, okay? We need to close
this one. So, I'll just close this. I
have now service A and service B open
over here.
Okay? So, what we are going to do is we
are going to first take a look at
service A.
All right. So, service A is the tax
service. So, if you come over here,
okay? Let's come over here.
Service B, okay? This is service B.
So, what I would do is I would start
with service B first because this is the
service that provides the values
uh to the service A for calculating the
tax, okay? So, this is the first
service. And what I'm going to do is
here, instead of app one hello, I'm
going to say service hyphen B. Something
like this. Okay? Copy this, come over
here,
and also rename this to service B,
rename this to service B.
Okay? Container name service B over
here, okay?
Nothing else is needed over here, okay?
This will also be So, so within service
also I'll call this service B, service
B.
Okay? Everything is service B now,
right? And now scroll up. Let's take a
look at other things. The name of this
service is service B.
Replica is one, okay? Uh I have this I'm
matching the labels service B for all
the containers.
Okay, here I'm mentioning the labels,
okay? And then here the container name
is service B.
And I need to mention the image here.
So, image that we are going to pick
is tax service B. So, I'm going to copy
this tax service B.
Come over here and tax service B latest.
If you don't mention latest, it is
anyways going to get the latest image
for you, right? Now, here in ENV
I am not bothering about creating a
config map or anything else. I'll just
comment this out. I'll keep this very
simple, very, very simple, okay? So,
from here
I'm going to like comment this out.
Like so. And what does this expect? So,
this does not expect I I I think it
expects port.
Okay, but I'm not going to pass in port
over here. If you see the default port
is 4,000.
So, I'm not going to pass in port, okay?
That's completely fine. So, what we can
do is we can just turn off all the ENVs.
If you want to have this running on a
separate port, that's absolutely okay.
All right? And here you have to scroll
down and say container port will be
4,000 because the default port is 4,000.
And the service is going to run on
4,000, right? Now, if you go to the
service, okay, you have to make sure
that here also you update the ports,
okay? Here also you update the port.
Now, one thing over here.
Okay, one thing over here.
When you are creating the service for
service B,
okay? Should you use
node port over here?
Should you use node port?
Think about it. No, you should not. When
do you use node port? Node port you use
when you want to expose a particular
application or
expose a particular container or pod
basically onto your local machine for
testing, right?
But here service B, we are not going to
access from our local machine. But
instead service A is going to
communicate with service B. So, there is
a type of service that allows you to do
interservice communication in
Kubernetes, and that is cluster IP. So,
that is what we are going to use over
here.
Cluster IP. Okay? Now, over here, you
can see all the suggestions I'm getting.
Okay? So, you can see Okay, I'm not
going to accept all the suggestions. I
can, but see, since we updated
uh the node port type to that of cluster
IP, we don't need this property, node
port.
This we are going to
because this is for mentioning the port
of our local machine where this service
is going to be mapped. So, I'm going to
get rid of this. Okay? Now, port of the
service will be 4,000, and the target
port within the container will be 4,000.
Okay? That is what I've mentioned.
Okay? Pretty much simple and pretty much
to the point. Why are we using cluster
IP?
Why did we have node port first of all?
Node port is a kind of service that
allows us to expose a particular uh
particular pod basically, our particular
application onto a local machine on a
particular port so that we can access it
and test it. Okay? You have load
balancer as well uh as a type of service
which is used in production, but since
we're locally testing, we are not using
load balancer.
Now, why am I using cluster IP? Because
cluster IP enables interservice
communication. So, within the Kubernetes
uh cluster,
service A should be able to communicate
with service B, and that is why I have
assigned this as cluster IP. Okay? Now,
service B is internal only because it's
cluster IP, it is not node port, so it
cannot be exposed on my local machine.
It cannot be uh called from outside
Kubernetes, right? So, since we have
given this
as cluster IP, it will be exposed uh
using the service name. So, what is the
service name? Service name is service B.
Okay? So, service A can access service B
using service B {colon} 4,000. Let me
show that to you. Okay? So, this is
done. Okay, this is for service B. This
is just a very simple deployment and
service file that we have defined.
Now, I'll come over here.
Okay, and here I have mentioned this is
service B. So, here I'll say this is
service {hyphen} A, like so, okay?
Service A.
I'll copy this.
Okay, Visual Studio Code is very smart.
It's suggesting me everything.
Pretty good.
Right, come over here. Scroll down,
scroll down. App one hello, this will be
service A, this will be service A. Okay,
now this is done.
Okay?
I'll save this.
Now, here when it comes to ENV, I'm not
going to bother to create the
config map. We can create that later,
but first let's get this service up and
running. We'll go step by step. Right?
And here I'll enable this, okay? So,
I'll just hard code the values.
So, first thing is I'm going to get rid
of uh
I'm going to get rid of
this uh like I don't want two ENVs.
Okay?
Here.
So, here I'm going to
Here I'm going to say ENV value, okay?
Instead of ENV value,
uh what is the name of So, one second.
So, what is the name of
the ENV? Name of the ENV is tax service
URL. And port also we can pass in if you
want to customize the port, but I'm not
customizing it. Let it run on 3,000,
which is default.
So, I'll take tax service URL over here.
And I'll mention the name as tax service
URL. And what what will be the tax
service URL over here?
Okay? It will be HTTP.
You can see over here, service {hyphen}
B {colon} 4,000. This is going to be
the tax service URL.
Correct? Why service B? Because this is
what the service name is. Right? Here,
this is what the service name is.
And it's having cluster IP, right? So,
it's not exposed outside Kubernetes
cluster. You can access it inside
Kubernetes cluster. So, I hope this is
making sense as to what we are doing and
why we are doing how we are setting up
inter-service communication.
And then you'll have to get the image.
So, I'll come over here.
And here this is the image name tax
service A. So, I'll come over here.
And here I'll update this image to that
of tax service A.
That is it. I think we are all
set now. So,
deployment service one service A service
A
and if you scroll down, okay, 8080.
Okay. Service A node port. Why are we
giving node port over here to this
particular service which is service A?
Yes.
Think. Why did we give cluster IP over
here? Because this is not being accessed
from a local machine. But service A we
need to access it from a local machine
and hence it's node port and I'm
exposing it over here on 3200. Okay, one
thing we forgot, we need to update the
port over here. The port by default is
4000. Let me see what is the port by
default.
Better to cross-check. Okay, 3000. It's
not 4000.
So, here I'll have 3000. Okay. And here
also I'll update this to
3000. Okay, and this target also I'll
update this to 3000. So, this is a
service port and there's a target port
within the container for the service.
I'll save this. Okay. I hope this is
making sense over here as to what we are
doing and why we are doing. Right? This
is done.
Now, what I can do is here service A
service B are done. Okay. So, I'll come
over here.
First of all, uh if you see
there are few pods that are running,
right? Few pods. One pod one service
will be running. So, what I will do is
I'll do a clean up. Okay. And for doing
a clean up there is a command
kubectl delete all
flag two times like hyphen hyphen two
times and all. Okay. If I run this
you'll see
all the service pod and deployment is
deleted. So, there's nothing now
running. No pods will be running, right?
I'll clear this out. Okay, this is done.
And I'm in some other directory, so I'll
just change this to one level up and
I'll do PWD. I'm in KTS now. Now I'll do
app2.
Oops.
app2 tax calculator, okay? Now I'm in
this directory where I have service A
folder and service B folder. Service A
has app.yaml and service B also has
app.yaml, okay? So what I'm going to do
is I'm going to say cube CTL Okay, cube
cuddle apply and I'm going to say hyphen
F, okay? And first thing we are going to
call We are going to apply service B,
okay? So I'm going to say service hyphen
B like so. Okay? Let me press enter. The
moment you press enter, all the files
within the service B folder will be
applied. So there is one file which is
app.yaml which has service definition
and the deployment definition, right? So
you can see services and deployments are
created, okay? Then you will also apply
service A.
Okay, this is done. And then you can
finally get the pods here. You can get
the pods. So you can see over here
service A pod is running and service B
pod is running. Okay, you can have this
in watch mode. Okay, they both are
running now, okay? Now what we need to
do is let us try accessing
Let us try accessing
service A. And how would you access
service A? So here you need to come in.
And here service A is being exposed on
port 3200.
Okay. And what is the URL? The URL that
you need to pass in is So there is a
There should be a sample URL.
Sample API call over here.
Okay.
So here Okay, this is for tax.
This is for tax. No, service A
sample call will be Okay, this is a
sample call, right? So you can copy this
entire thing. Copy this.
And then come over here and then paste
over here and then instead of 3000 this
will be 3200 because node port is
exposing at 32000 port on our local
machine. And just press enter.
You're going to see over here. You can
see service B is running in this
container.
Okay. This is a
service B pod. So you can see service B
WH2NB.
You can see WH2NB, right?
Tax amount is eight.
Amount is 200. Service A
is service A is running on this
container. You can see over here.
You can see FDZCH. So this is FDZCH.
Perfect. And the total is 208. Okay, if
you pass in some other country it is
going to work absolutely fine. Something
like this.
Now can you access service B from your
local machine? Uh sorry. Uh can you
access
can you access the service for tax from
your local machine?
Can you access? No, you cannot. You
cannot access because it's in cluster
IP. You have assigned the service type
as cluster IP, right? So it cannot be
accessed. So service B is not
accessible. It is there only for
inter-service communication.
Only the internal services
that exist in Kubernetes can refer to it
using service names. Right? Service
names. So here we are making use of
service names which is cluster IP.
Right? I hope this is making sense and I
hope you all are able to follow and I
hope you all have idea as to how you can
deploy microservices into Kubernetes
cluster. It's pretty easy. Okay? This
can be in any programming language. It
does not matter. Okay? But you can do
so. Right? And now you can even update
this
to make use of config map or something
like that. You can update this, right?
You don't need to hardcode the
variables, right?
Also I'll tell you something.
Here I'm having one YAML file. Within
service A, I have app.yaml. You can
create deployment.yaml and service.yaml
within service A. You can separate both
these.
Okay? And you can have under service B
also, you can have uh deployment.yaml
and service.yaml. Okay? You can do that.
And now, if you want to delete
everything, delete the deployment, what
are you going to do is
you're going to say kubectl. Okay? There
has to be a delete command that we had
run.
Okay? So, here apply delete {hyphen}f.
Okay? And you're going to say everything
in the current folder.
Oops. Sorry. Not everything in the
current folder, because in current
folder, there are two folders. So,
you're going to say
delete service
A first, and then you can delete service
B.
So, you can see both are deleted now.
Okay? And now, if you try to get pods,
you're not going to get any pods. No
pods exist.
If you try to refresh this, this is not
going to ex- exist. Okay? This is going
to fail because the pods are removed.
And if you want to turn them up, you can
absolutely, you know, turn them up. You
can see service A
and then service B as well.
Like so.
So, both the services are up. Right? And
now, if you refresh,
oops. Now, if you refresh,
okay? You can see it's started. It's up
and running.
Right? And you can even scale this. So,
now I can come over here. Let's say I
want to scale service A to that of two
replicas over here. Okay?
And let me scale this over here. I can
say
uh service A apply. You can see
configured and unchanged. Now, if you
see
here, you're going to have multiple pods
running. Okay? So, multiple pods for
service A, because you scaled service A.
You can scale it back to one if you wish
to. I'll scale it down.
Replicas one, and I can just say apply
service A.
And you can just get the pods. You can
see the other pod is
being shut, and that is why you have
this error status. Right? One pod is
being shut. Now, if you go, there are
only two pods.
Right? I hope this is making sense and I
hope you all have understood the entire
crux of how you can run and manage
microservices into Kubernetes clusters.
So, now it's time where we begin talking
about things or life before CI/CD. And
why we talking about how things used to
operate before CI/CD
was used. So, the reason for this is it
will help us set a strong base in
understanding the importance of why this
kind of thing was even bought in.
So, let's get started. So, before CI/CD,
just to give you a sense, everything
used to be pretty much manual, okay?
CI/CD bought in automation into the
software development workflow or
software development pipeline. But,
before that came into picture,
everything was pretty much manual. So,
how things used to happen is this is a
developer that you're seeing over here.
And this developer would writing some
sort of code. And the moment he pushes
the code to the repository, he writes in
code and his job will be to run the
test, okay? Then, he would build the app
locally onto his machine. And then, he
would build the Docker image, okay?
Assuming that the application makes use
of Docker. So,
he built a Docker image and then, he'll
push the Docker image to a remote Docker
registry. So, just reiterating on the
steps, he'll first make changes into the
code onto his laptop or onto his
machine. And he will push a new feature
or a bug fix. And once he does that,
okay, he there will be some sort of
manual testing that will happen
with the new feature that has been
pushed. The app will be built, okay?
Built as in, you know, if it's a
Java-based application, JAR file will be
created. If it's a Python application,
some sort of build process will be
there. If it's a web application or
Node.js application, you know, there is
a process of building the application
before deploying it to production. All
that things will happen. Build process
of any sort of programming language
exist. So, that will happen.
Then your Docker image will be created
assuming that the
project is making use of
containerization, and then the Docker
image will be pushed to
the remote repository or remote to
Docker Hub.
Now, here the build process of the app,
the build process of the Docker image,
and pushing the image to a remote repo,
all of this is, you know, pretty much
manual. Okay? Pretty much manual. And
then once this is done, the image
happens to be pushed to Docker registry,
and then from there
it's going to be deployed to production,
and then someone is going to verify
whether the application is working
properly in the production. You know,
like whether the application is live and
whether the right version number has
been deployed. Now, this entire workflow
was completely manual. Okay? Manual
dependency, like human dependency, will
be there at every point in the or every
stage that you see over here. Okay? And
just to put this in the form of a
software development pipeline, first the
code is written. Okay?
Once the code is written,
it's being tested. Then it's being
built. Built as in there's a build
process, you know, if you're using a
Java application or if you're building a
Java application, JAR file will be
created. Okay? Then the application is
packaged. And package meaning the image
creation and the image image tagging and
version will happen. See, code meaning
you will push the code to GitHub. It is
merged with the right right branch.
Testing as in unit test, integration
test, quality checks, all that will
happen. Build as in JAR or binary
creation will happen. Then package as in
Docker image creation and image tagging
will happen. Then the image is pushed to
the
Docker Hub or Docker registry. Okay,
this is the artifact with that is being
created. Artifact as in the distribute
the version of the software that can be
distributed like in the form of Docker
image. Okay, so that is being pushed and
then it is being deployed to a server
virtual machine or Kubernetes, whatever
the team is using. And there the
configuration and the secrets are
applied and then the application is
checked after the application is
deployed. So there are health checks
that will run
and if things are not working as
expected, roll back will be done. Okay,
so the
build will be rolled back. Now this was
the entire software development
pipeline.
And you know, this was completely human
driven. There is no sort of automation
that is triggered when the
code changes that are happening. No sort
of automated processes there. Like at
every step there is a human intervention
or a human coming in and making the
changes. Now the question is the
question is
this is manual, right? This is a
completely manual process. There is a
human dependency risk involved because
if human makes any sort of error, okay,
it's it's going to cost for the mistake,
right? And the process is slow
and painful. There is there is a painful
feedback loop because it's very slow,
you know, because humans are involved.
Okay, so the question is should growing
team
trust humans every time?
Should growing team trust humans every
time? So just think about this. The
answer to this is no, okay, because
because you know, as you scale as the
application scales, you cannot trust
humans. Of course, there has to be some
sort of automation automation in place.
Uh things have to be automated because
there will be large teams, a lot of
developers that will be working on a
common code base. So growing team cannot
trust humans every time, all
And what do you think of this question
over here? Let me know in the community,
the Q&A forum, and let me know what you
think about this. I hope this is clear
as to how life used to be before the
advent of CI/CD.
So, now it's time we begin talking about
continuous integration and continuous
deployment and understand what it is.
So, we know the software development
pipeline. It starts with coding, then
testing, building. So, building as in
once you write the code, you test the
application, you build the application.
Building as in you create let's say if
it's a Java application, you create a
JAR file. And then you package it into
something called as Docker image or an
executable that can be distributed. And
then you push it to wherever you want
it. So, if it's a Docker image, you push
it to Docker Hub. Then you deploy it,
and then you verify whether the
application on production is working
fine. Okay? Now, what is CI? So, CI
stands for continuous integration. And
continuous integration is this part of
software
development pipeline over here that you
see
I have highlighted, right? So, every
code change, when it comes to continuous
integration process, every code change
is automatically built, tested as soon
as it is pushed to the repository.
Let me come again, okay? CI stands for
So, when you say CI/CD, I'm just talking
about CI and not the CD part.
Okay? When you say CI/CD, there are two
terms involved, CI and CD. CI stands for
continuous integration, and CD stands
for continuous
deployment. We'll come to that CD part,
but let's talk about CI first. So, CI
stands for continuous integration, like
I said, and it is this part of software
development wherein you start with code,
test, build, and package. So, once you
package the application, the CI part in
the software development pipeline ends.
Okay? So, here you can see every code
change that the developer does. Now,
what will developer do? He'll make
changes of the code on his local working
copy, and he'll push the code onto the
Git repository. Now, as soon as the code
is pushed, there is a automated process
that will be triggered if you're making
use of CI.
Okay? Automated process will be
triggered as soon as the code is pushed
to the repository, and these steps will
be executed.
Okay? So, code is pushed, that triggers
the process, and then you have automated
testing. Automated testing would involve
execution of unit test, integration
test, test, quality checks, whatever is
configured in the CI process. Then you
have build, wherein the JAR or binary
creation will be created or will be
done. And then the application will be
packaged. Now, packaging involves image
creation, Docker image creation.
You might want to tag image versioning,
all of that you would do. Right? And
this is all automated, and it is
triggered when Git push is called or
when a developer pushes the code to a
remote Git repository. Everything is
called automatically. Now, why What is
the goal of CI? Why does this sort of
process exist? Okay? So, the goal of CI
is
one one one of the goal is to detect
bugs early. Okay? So, as soon as you
push the code, any sort of changes is
made in the code, test cases run, the
application is built and packaged and
pushed to
the Docker Hub. So, here, if when
whenever the code was pushed, if there
are any sort of issues or bugs, they all
are identified in the subsequent steps.
Okay? So, it's one one thing or one goal
of CI is to help detect bugs early.
Okay? Second goal over here, I would
say, is to avoid integration conflicts.
Now, integration conflicts meaning see
whenever you merge code, you are working
on a feature and other developer is also
working on a feature. Whenever you
combine both the codes, there could be
some integration issues because the code
you both have written. Right? So,
merging and testing early uh helps you
identify or detect those sort of bugs
very in in very initial stages of the
software development pipeline.
Right? And that is beneficial for
everyone in the team.
So, that is the goal number two. And the
third goal is to ensure that the main
branch is always uh stable, okay? And
every commit is buildable. So, that
these are a few uh goal or benefits, I
would say, of continuous integration.
Okay? And keep in mind continuous
integration ends continuous integration
ends once you have a packaged output or
once the software artifact is ready.
Okay? Now, if you're not aware of this
term software artifact, software
artifact is a ready to deploy packaged
output of the build process.
Okay? Ready to deploy
packaged output of the build process is
known as software artifact. Right? So,
once you get the software artifact,
where will you get software artifact in
this entire process? You will get it in
the package step.
Right? Because once you hit the package
step and once the application is
packaged into Docker image or whatever
you have configured over here, I'm
taking the example of Docker over here.
If you package the application in
Docker, it's ready to deploy. It's ready
to distribute, okay? And that is where
you have a software artifact in place
and that is where the CI process ends.
Okay? CI meaning continuous integration
ends over here. Okay? So, where does it
end? It ends once you have uh the uh
distributed distributable version of the
software, which is software artifact.
Okay? Which you have naturally after the
package step. Now, once this is done,
okay, you have continuous deployment.
So, this first part was continuous
integration. Then you have continuous
deployment wherein these steps comes in
like you push uh push the
image to that of Docker Hub. And Docker
Hub or whichever registry you have
configured, you deploy it, and then you
also verify it onto the production.
Okay? Now, CD, this is CD, which is
continuous deployment. So, this
uh this says that every successful build
is automatically deployed to an
environment without manual intervention.
So, once you have a software version
packaged,
okay, your responsi- the goal of CD CD
will come into place, and CD will do the
job of pushing, deploying, and verifying
the application onto the production. And
the goal of CD is to deliver fast. So,
whenever there is a new code change that
is being done, testing is automatically
done, build is automatically done,
package is automatically done by CI. And
then CD comes into play, it will push uh
the deployable version, and it'll
deploy, and then it'll verify. So,
whenever code change is done, you will
have a version being deployed. Okay, so
goal over here is to deliver really,
really fast as soon as developers are
building and committing something.
Right? So,
there will be
a fast delivery
and consistent delivery. So, it'll be
consistent, and it will reduce the
release risk because you are releasing
continuously. Okay? I hope this entire
thing is making sense, this entire
pipeline, and you are understanding how
we are breaking this down into CI and
CD. Okay? Now,
if if you compare this with manual and
CI CD in pre-CI CD era, all of these
steps were manually triggered. Like some
human was doing all of this manually.
So, either one single person was
responsible for this entire pipeline or
there were multiple people at different
stages in the pipeline who were
responsible. And here, since it was
manually triggered, multiple people
involved, it always leads to blame game.
Uh you know, uh and uh inefficiencies,
inconsistencies, and it's the process
the entire process is in general is uh
prone to errors. Okay? But, when uh when
you have CI/CD, you know, things become
much more easier with the manual way.
You always uh had broken releases, late
feedback, and always there was a fear of
deployments among the teams, right? But,
CI/CD came into uh this thing and it
automated this entire flow wherein
developers can now uh commit without any
fear of problems.
So, yes, here comes the punchline.
Before CI/CD, software quality depended
on human discipline
and not automation. Now, you cannot
always be dependent on human uh
discipline. And this is this is a
problem this is a major problem that
CI/CD solved. So, CI basically does the
job of building and verifying the
software. And CD does the job of
delivering and deploying the software.
Okay? CI stops at the artifact stage.
Like once you have a software artifact
ready, which is the distributable
version of the software, and CD takes
over from there and it does the job of
deploying the software. All right? And
before CI/CD, like I said, entire
process was manual. A developer would
manually test, build, create Docker
image, push to Docker registry. There
were lots of steps involved, and
generally you would have a text file
with all the commands, and you would
just do copy-pasting. Right? And with
CI/CD, this became very
uh easy and low stress with with low
stress. Because, you know, some
developers might even skip the tests.
They might not run tests because they
have to deploy quickly. Right? So,
imagine like pushing the code and then
you want to deploy quickly, so you're
going to skip the test and then you will
uh deploy it and then something breaks
in the production and then everybody's
like okay how did this happen? You know,
so with the automated process the these
things cannot happen builds are
consistent things are very easy
and they're transparent. I hope this has
been useful and clear.
So now it's time we start talking about
CI/CD pipelines and pipeline engines
that exist. So what is a pipeline first
of all? Okay, so pipeline is nothing but
a predefined sequence of steps that run
automatically to take your code from
developer to that of production.
So see we have a software development
workflow wherein once the code is
written they it has to be you know
tested then built then the image is
built then uh
uh you know it's pushed to a remote
repository you like Docker Hub and then
it's deployed and then it's verified. So
these are the steps involved in a
software development pipeline or a
software development workflow. So what
is a pipeline? A pipeline is a
predefined sequence of steps that would
run
uh automatically to take your code from
the developer's machine to that of
production. And you can think of it like
a assembly line in a factory wherein you
have different stations and each station
would
would do its job and the output of one
station would become an input to
the next station in the
in the queue, okay?
So pipeline is nothing but just to put
it in the form of equation pipeline
consists of
order and the automation over here.
Okay, so
typically pipeline would have like
getting the latest code then testing it
building the application grading the
image pushing it to the remote
repository deploying and then verifying.
So here you have different steps okay?
And there is an order in in these steps
should be executed. It cannot be just in
random order, right? So, there has to be
an order in which these steps are
executed. And also, they have to be
executed in a automated way. So,
pipeline is nothing but steps plus order
plus automation over here, right? Now,
without a pipeline So, there are two
tools first of all, okay? So, two tools
that help us run pipelines are Jenkins
and GitHub Actions, okay? These two are
very popular. And if you are
if you are if you have read about CI/CD
before, it's likely you must have heard
about these two tools often, okay? And
yeah, I was talking about pipelines. So,
pipeline is really important wherein you
know, without a pipeline,
dev is going to do everything manually.
But with pipeline, things are really
automated. And pipeline is actually not
a tool. Jenkins and GitHubs are tools.
Okay? Pipeline, when you write a
pipeline, you are not creating or you
are not having a tool. Pipeline is not a
tool, okay? Jenkins and GitHub Actions
are tools that help you run pipeline.
And pipeline it's in itself is a
combination of logic, steps, and flow.
Like I said over here in the previous
slide, it consists of steps, order, and
automation, okay? Now, Jenkins and
GitHub Actions are two popular tools
that help you run pipelines. And
depending on the organization or the
project that you're working on, it's
likely that either of these two tools
will be used to create a CI/CD
pipelines, okay? And this is what a
pipeline looks like over here. So, here
you have a pipeline and the trigger is
the push of code.
And then there are multiple stages,
right? Within this So, these stages are
nothing but steps over here, okay? So,
you have test, build, then you create
Docker image or push to Docker, and then
deploy, and then verify. So, these are
multiple stages or you can say steps
that are involved in a pipeline. And
within these stages, there will will
uh commands that will be written
basically to do a particular operation.
Okay? So, that is what a pipeline is.
And this is how it looks like. Now, let
me head over to the browser over here.
Now, here on the browser, I have this
website jenkins.io.
So, this is the official website of uh
Jenkins. And uh here
uh you can read more about Jenkins if
you're curious. So, you can see over
here, it is the leading open-source
automation server. So, first of all,
Jenkins is automate open-source
uh CI/CD automation server. And uh it is
very widely used pipeline engine. And it
uh it basically runs uh the series of
steps on code changes, supports complex
workflows. It has many good features
that you can read more about over here.
So, you can see over here, easy
installation, easy configuration,
plugins, extensible, distributed. And uh
you can read more. Okay, you can come
and read more. You can go through the
documentation as well. But, this is the
official website of Jenkins. Then, you
have uh
one one more uh tool that I just spoke
about, which is GitHub Actions.
And uh this is a uh
tool that is provided to us by GitHub.
Okay? So, GitHub uh is the one behind
this. And you can see over here, it
makes it easy for us to automate all
software workflows.
And uh it helps you build, test, deploy
your code right from GitHub. So, the
moment you push your code to GitHub, it
is basically configured with GitHub. And
once you push the code to GitHub, it
basically uh runs and uh makes code
reviews, branch management, everything.
Okay? Whatever you define over there.
So, this is how it works. You can see
over here. So, on push, okay? Here you
have this YAML file that you have
created. So, yes, the configuration for
this is written in YAML file. And once
you push, uh so, here a build process
will happen, then testing will happen,
and then publish will happen. So, this
is how it works. Okay? And you can read
more about uh this entire
uh this tool over here. You can see a
sample file over here as well, right?
And this is the UI.
Okay. Uh you can just go through this
website just to get familiar with what
it is. But yeah, GitHub Actions is also
quite popular and a lot of companies are
using it. Okay, and the best part is it
is a CI/CD engine built directly into
GitHub since GitHub is the organization
behind this. I hope this has been useful
and clear.
Hey there. So now I want to talk a
little bit more about GitHub Actions. So
here on the official website of GitHub
Actions, you're going to see this link
of or get started with Actions and this
is going to take you to the
documentation. Now, why uh people are
preferring GitHub Actions? Because there
is zero setup. Like you don't need to
install anything onto your system
uh because there is there is no server
needed, there is uh nothing needed. It
just works out of the box with GitHub,
you know, and these days everybody uses
uh GitHub as the version control system,
Git and GitHub, and uh hence it's
becoming really easy for developers to
make use of GitHub Actions. So with
GitHub Actions, uh you know, you just uh
start writing YAML configurations
wherein you define your steps and the
trigger as to when the CI/CD pipeline
should be triggered. And whatever you
have defined in the series, it gets
executed whenever the trigger is met. So
for example, if you have mentioned the
event or the trigger as push, like code
push, so whenever there is a code push
in a particular repository or branch,
you know, you this is going to get
triggered.
The entire workflow of CI/CD that you
have defined. So that is how it works
and there is minimal setup. Like there's
no setup in fact. I I should not say
minimal setup. There's no setup in fact.
Like you are you making use of GitHub,
you can directly start working on a
CI/CD as well uh with GitHub Actions.
It's it's just works out of the box.
Okay, so that is why it's gaining a lot
of uh popularity. And uh what I would
recommend is you all should keep this
documentation handy over here.
Okay. So, this is really helpful and
here you can read more. So, if you get
stuck or if you want to enhance your
knowledge later on
down the line,
you know, you
it's best you know what what are the
official sources of learning this. Okay.
So, so yeah, this is what I wanted to
mention about GitHub Actions and I hope
this is useful.
So, now it's time we begin talking about
some of the fundamentals and
terminologies that you will often come
across when you're working with CI/CD.
All right. So, let us begin talking
about what all we are going to discuss.
So, there are four important terms that
you need to understand. First is the
workflows. Then we have something called
as jobs.
We have steps. And then we have
something called as runners and we'll be
understanding this
in
clarity and in detail. Okay. So, let's
get started. So, first of all, what is a
workflow? So, workflow is nothing but a
the full automation process
that you do with the help of CI/CD. That
entire thing is known as a workflow. So,
if I have to put it simply, workflow is
nothing but your entire pipeline. Okay.
The entire pipeline is called as
workflow. It starts with an event. Now,
event can be a code push. Okay. A code
push can be an event. It start with an
event and ends with the end. And end is
usually is deployment or
verification after deployment. That is
what usually it is. Okay.
Then the next terminology that you have
is job. Okay. Now, what is job? So, job
is nothing but a big unit of work or a
major task that happens inside a
particular workflow. Okay. Now, a
workflow can have one job or it can even
have multiple jobs. Now, one job can be
So, I have to give you an example If I
have to give you an example, one job can
be responsible for building the entire
application. All right, so it's a major
unit of work that is taking care of
building the entire application. Then
another job could be like doing testing
or testing the application. Now this
involves multiple tasks in it like
running integration test, unit test, or
checking for any sort of vulnerability.
So all sort of tests are run over there.
So testing basically is one job with
multiple steps in it, okay?
Uh then you have like deployment job,
okay? Okay? And there could be multiple
steps for deployment in it, okay? So job
is basically a major unit of work or a
major task inside a particular workflow.
And there can be multiple jobs that are
running in parallel or they can even run
one after another, okay? So it depends.
Uh so this is about job. I hope this is
making sense. And then you have
something called as steps.
Now steps are nothing but individual
steps or individual commands that get
executed inside a job. So see,
a job can be building an image, all
right? But building an image is a series
of steps. It's not just one command.
There could be series of steps in a
particular job. So those series of
commands are nothing but individual
steps
that are within the job, okay? So steps
are inside the job and a job is a part
of a workflow. I hope this is making
sense, okay? Now if you're planning to
test the application, uh like one step
like it would have multiple tests that
you might want to run. One is
integration testing, uh you know, you
might want to run unit testing, you
might want to verify the app for
vulnerabilities. All of these sort of
tests you might want to run. So running
unit tests, there might be series of
commands that you might want to run.
Uh running integration tests, there
might be series of commands that you
might want to run. So every command that
you run is one step. That is what it
means. I hope this is making sense. And
then you have the concept of runner.
Now what is a runner? So runner is a
computer a sort of machine I should say,
okay? That gets provisioned to run your
job. Okay? So, see, this job, workflow,
steps, everything has to run somewhere.
Right? So, the runner, it runs on
runner. Everything executes on a runner,
and runner is a temporary computer or
machine that gets provisioned for the
entire thing to run, okay? And it can be
GitHub-hosted, okay? Usually
Ubuntu-based, and or it can be
self-hosted as well, okay? So, so I hope
this making sense. Now, let us see how
they all fit in together. So, first you
have a workflow, okay? Which is the
entire pipeline, like I said. Then,
within workflow, you have one or
multiple jobs. So, here I've shown two
jobs, but you can have multiple jobs.
And then, within jobs, you have multiple
steps. And all of this runs on a runner.
I hope this is making sense. So, so
if I have to also show this or
demonstrate this with the help of an
exa- of with the help of a diagram, not
example. This is actually an example
only. So, see, you might have this
workflow. So, so this entire green part
that you see, this is the entire
workflow. Within workflow, you have this
one job, which is responsible for
building and testing the application.
And within this job, you have multiple
steps. So, step one will check out the
code, step two will run the test, and
step three will build the app. Okay? So,
you can have multiple jobs. So, this is
the first job, build and test. Then, you
have another job, which is build image
and deploy, and that again has series of
steps, right? So, this is steps, okay?
And then, you have these are jobs,
right? And this entire part, this entire
pipeline is a workflow, and this entire
workflow runs on a machine that is
called as a runner. I hope this diagram
is helping you understand how the entire
process works. So, you have jobs, that
is major unit of work. Within jobs, you
have steps, okay? Steps are nothing but
individual unit of work or commands that
get executed.
One and and the entire pipeline is known
as workflow and one pipeline can have
multiple jobs. Okay, one job can have
multiple steps. And the entire thing
runs on a runner.
I hope this makes sense. Okay?
Now, what exactly happens
in the real world? Okay, so generally
the CI/CD pipelines are tied to a event
and the event is generally a trigger
that gets pulled in. So,
some events some common events are like
developer pushes a code or a pull
request is created or there can also be
a manual trigger like you can trigger a
CI/CD pipeline manually as well. Okay,
so depending on what your requirement
is, there is a trigger and that once
that event happens,
trigger is basically the event. So, once
that event happens, okay, what happened
is what happens is workflow is selected.
Okay? So, GitHub Actions will check for
a workflow that listens to this
particular event and it will select that
particular workflow. Now, once the
workflow is selected, a job is
scheduled. So, inside the workflow
GitHub is going to see, okay, there are
these jobs that are defined and to run
these jobs, I'm going to need a machine
now, right? Where do I run these? So, a
runner is provisioned, right? And this
runner is sort of a virtual machine you
can say or container. It's a clean
environment where, you know, everything
that you've defined is going to be
executed. And then uh steps execute on
the runner, like I said, and then the
job finishes. Okay, uh and everything
happens in series and the job can be
successful or it can be a failure. If
it's successful, it's successful. If
it's failure, you will see why it
failed. Okay? Then the runner is
destroyed after job completion, the
runner is deleted, machine is cleaned
up, and nothing is reused. So, every
time a runner is provisioned,
it is a clean machine or a fresh machine
that is being provisioned for that
particular workflow or jobs to run. And
then it's marked as complete. Okay? So
So yeah, this is the entire workflow in
using the diagram. And I hope this is
helping you visualize and understand the
concepts very easily. Okay? I hope this
has been useful.
All right. So it's time we go a little
bit hands-on and start creating our
first uh
our first
CI/CD pipeline. Okay? This is going to
be a We're going to just going to make
use of the UI and have things up and
running. So what I'm going to do is and
what I also recommend you doing is come
over to your GitHub repository,
whichever repository you're working on,
okay? And click on this Actions tab over
here. So on every repository that you're
working on, you're going to see this
Actions tab. So this is the official
repository that I'm on for
uh the DevOps course and I'm going to
click on Actions over here.
And here, when you click on Actions,
you're going to see
it's asking me to select uh a workflow.
Okay? So you can see over here, it is
suggesting some pre-built workflow that
already exists over here. So there are a
set of pre-built workflows. So these are
workflows that are suggested for this
repository. So it's suggesting a
workflow that can build a Docker image
to deploy, run, or push to the Docker
registry. So there's a ready-made
workflow that exists.
This is a workflow to publish a Node.js
package to GitHub packages.
Publish a Java package with Maven. So
all these ready-made workflows exist.
These are pre-built. Okay? And based on
a repository, it is suggesting us these
workflows. And then you have some
workflows around deployment, security,
CI automation, and all of that. Okay?
You can even browse category-wise. So
this is really helpful when GitHub
provides you a list of uh
a list of workflows that are already
there. Now, if you click on Configure,
you can directly start using it. Okay?
But we are not going to pick any
workflow. We're going to come over here.
Now, here you can see at the top, you
can even set up a workflow for yourself
where where in it will take you to an
editor. So, if you click this, if you
open this in a new tab, it is going to
take you in an editor and you can see
over here, it has created this file
automatically, main.yml.
Right? Main.yml file because GitHub
Actions,
you can define pipelines using YAML
files like YAML syntax. So, it has
already it is automatically created this
main.yml
under this .github folder. So, just see
the location. Okay, there is a lot to
learn over here.
The location where this YAML file is
being created. So, first of all, is the
repository.
Then within repository, it has created a
.github folder. Did .github folder
already exist? No. It has created for us
over here. Okay? And why is it creating
dot github folder over here? Uh because
see, whatever you are writing in terms
of CI/CD with GitHub Actions, everything
is to be written under this .github
folder. And this is a folder. Uh
so, it GitHub actually can recognize
this folder. That is why it separates
the the CI/CD pipelines that you write.
And what happens is if you're making use
of GitHub, there is a GitHub's internal
automation engine that looks for the
pipelines and generally it looks for
this particular folder. And this is
GitHub's way of segregating things and
making sure that it detects everything
automatically. Okay? So, if you have a
pipeline to be defined and if you want
it to be picked up by GitHub Actions
automatically or GitHub automatically,
you have to make use of this .github
folder. That is the convention. And
within that, it has created this
workflows folder. Okay? So,
.github/workflows
is the path. And you have a main.yml.
Okay? And you can see over here, it is
creating this in the working direct
working branch.
Now, working is the branch name over
here, which is the default branch for
this repository of mine. Okay? So,
whichever is the default repository set
for your GitHub account or for your
GitHub repository, not for your GitHub
account, for your GitHub repository, it
is going to pick that one. And whatever
your file contents you add over here, so
you can enter
you can start writing in your pipeline
code. It is going to create this
pipeline and it is going to configure it
for you. And you can see over here it
has marketplace actions and
documentation as well over here. Okay.
So documentation is also pretty handy
and you can commit directly. Okay, but
we are not going to like I said, we are
not going to create a pipeline by
ourself. I'm going to use something
ready-made. Okay. So here I'm going to
come and I'm going to search for simple
workflow like so. And just press enter.
You're going to see over here simple
workflow and just click on configure.
Okay. So you can see over here this is
the simple workflow that can help us
understand and learn things. Okay. So
we'll take a look at this. So what this
says is these are comments. Okay. This
is a YAML structure and these are
comments. This is a basic workflow to
help you get started with actions. Okay.
And the name of this workflow is CI.
Right? And here this part this part of
the code it
I'll just zoom in. So this part of the
code just tells you
the trigger for this particular
workflow. Okay. So this controls this
part controls the when the workflow will
run. Okay. So this is going to So you
can see over here it is going to trigger
the workflow on push. So here we have
written push keyword. So it is going to
trigger the workflow on push or pull
request. Whenever there is a push or
pull request on this particular branch
working it is going to trigger this
workflow as you can see. Right? And it
is going to also allow you to run this
workflow manually from the actions tab.
Okay. So this is that
this is the workflow dispatch event that
we have mentioned over here. So this is
a name of the event. This is also name
of the event and this is also name of
the event. Okay. So I hope this is
making sense. So this part that I've
selected over here controls the trigger.
Trigger meaning controls the event when
this workflow is should be executed.
That is what you're defining over here.
So, you're defining three triggers. One
is on push event, okay? Another one is
on pull request, and third is you are
also enabling the
uh manual run for this workflow by
adding workflow dispatch. Okay, this is
done. So, this is the trigger part. And
how is trigger part defined using on
over here?
Now, if you scroll down, here you have
job section. Okay? So, if you hover on
this, the best part about this editor is
you will also get some documentation.
So, you can see on if you hover on uh on
uh keyword over here, you're going to
see it's a the the GitHub event that
triggers the workflow. Okay, an event
can be single string, array of event,
and all of this it's mentioned. Okay?
Jobs, basically, a workflow is made up
of uh one or more jobs that can run
sequentially or in parallel, like we
have like we know. Okay? And this
workflow is having a single job. So,
here we have defined only one job,
build, okay? And this is the name of the
job. Okay, you can define whatever name
you want to. So, build is what I've
defined. You can say build image or
clean image, verify image. Whatever you
want to have the name, you can mention.
Okay? And here you have mentioned the
name of the runner where this job will
run on. So, runs on controls this. Okay?
So, you can see over here, use runs on
to define the type of machine. Okay? And
this is a machine, and we have mentioned
Ubuntu latest over here. Okay? Ubuntu
latest. So, it will run on Ubuntu. And
then, within this job, within this job,
we have defined the steps. Now, steps
are nothing but the sequence of stars
that will be executed as a part of this
job. Okay? So, here what we are doing is
we are making use of uh
a GitHub action. Okay? So, that is what
we're mentioning over here. Okay? And
what this action is going to do is uh
here you can see.
Now, see, if you're writing CI/CD, okay?
If you're defining steps over here, you
will need to check out the code.
Check out the code, but where? Okay, so
like you know this
entire operation is running on a
separate machine. So here you have
mentioned that this runner, okay, and
this entire operation is going to run on
this particular machine. This machine is
temporary. It does not have anything
initially, right? So you want, let's
say, to build the application. So you
will need have to download your source
code onto this machine, right? So what
you are doing over here is you're making
use of this action checkout@v4.
Okay? Now,
what is this action? Okay, we have not
created this. So yes, here
I won't go super depth into this, okay?
We'll be understanding this down the
line, but I'm just giving you a gist
over here. This is a pre-built action
that exists on
marketplace. Okay, it's a pre-built
action. And this action we have not
written, so there are such pre-built
actions that have been already written,
and you can use it in your code. So what
this does is it tells to download the
GitHub source code, okay, onto your
machine that has been provisioned so
that the job can access it. That's what
it says. And then we are running this
one-line script, which is a simple
script, simple shell command, okay,
uh that says hello world.
Okay? So we are saying name,
okay, over here. Name is just a name,
and we are executing this command, echo
hello world. And since it's a Ubuntu
machine, we are making use of echo.
Okay? And then we are running one more
command. Okay, this is a
set of command that we are running over
here, multiple commands into a single
step. You can see run a multi-line
script. So here one echo and another
echo. Okay? So it's a very simple
pipeline that has been created with
nothing
that there is no sort of complexity.
Okay? We are defining the name just to
give you a flow or the structure of the
the actions file or the pipeline file
over here.
We're defining the name, we're defining
the trigger, then we're defining the
jobs, and within jobs we have steps.
And within steps,
we have like individual tasks that are
defined. Okay? Now, what we can do is we
can come over here. Okay? We can just
say commit. Okay? Before doing commit,
I'll also tell you here I mentioned like
this is a actions that we are using.
Okay? This is a action that we're using
from the marketplace, and on the
right-hand side you can see over here
marketplace and search for actions.
Okay? You can see
check out over here. Okay? You can
search for check out. So, it will check
out a GitHub repository at a particular
version. You can mention that. Okay? So,
all of this is there. Okay? These are
all ready-made actions that you can use
of. But anyways, I'm going to do commit
over here and see where this is being
committed. Okay? {dot} github workflows
and blank {dot} yaml.
All right? Blank {dot} yaml.
So, what I'm going to do is I'm going to
say commit here.
Okay? And here this will create a blank
{dot} yaml. I'm going to
commit. So, this is created now.
Okay? So, you can see this has been
created. Where it has been created, it
has been created in {dot} github folder
{slash} work workflows, and within that
you have blank {dot} yaml. Now, what you
can do is you can come over here to
actions file, or sorry, actions tab over
here.
And you're going to see all the
workflows and everything, like all the
runs from all the workflows. Okay? So,
we have created this
blank {dot} yaml, and it's on this
particular branch. And you can see it's
been 6 seconds ago. All right?
And this particular action,
this particular pipeline was created to
trigger on push.
Right? On push whenever something is
pushed to the repository. So, there has
been a push wherein when we created this
particular file. Right? We had to push.
So, this got executed. So, you can see
there already has been one run.
Okay, there has been one run already
because you created something, we
changed something onto this particular
working branch. And you can see it
executed 1 minute ago and it ran for 6
seconds. Okay, this has been a workflow
run and you can click on this and see
the details. So, if you go inside, okay,
you can go inside and you can see all
the details over here. So, there was a
push that triggered this 1 minute ago
and I actually created uh, this
particular file. So, it triggered a push
and this uh, CI pipeline got executed
over here. You can see over here. And
this is the commit that triggered this.
And uh, the status is success. Total
duration it ran for was 6 seconds. And
here you can see this visual
representation wherein if you click on
build, okay, you're going to see what
happened inside this build. So, this
build is actually a job.
Okay, let me open the YAML file side by
side so that you have some decent
understanding of what's happening. So,
here you go to GitHub .github/workflows
and if you go to blank.yml, okay, here
you're going to see the job name is
build.
Can you see the job name as build?
What is job name?
Job name is build over here. And here
you can see
build, right? On the left-hand side
you're seeing CI over here, this side.
On the left-hand side you're seeing CI.
Why are you seeing CI? Because the name
of this workflow is CI.
I hope this is making sense as to how
these things that you've defined in YAML
file are mapping to that UI. Everything
is being mapped from this YAML file to
the UI. Okay? So, on the left-hand side,
let me go back. On the left-hand side,
under all workflows, you're seeing CI.
Why are you seeing CI?
Because that's the name of your
uh, of your pipeline, right? If you
click on this, you will see here the uh,
workflow has been executed once. If you
click on this,
right? Uh, you will see uh, this is the
job that was executed. If you have
multiple jobs, you're going to see them
over here. But right now we have only
one job. So, if I click on this job,
you're going to see all the steps as to
how this executed. So, you can see set
up the job. Okay, so this got set up
over here. You can see the runner image
was provisioned over here. The operating
system was provisioned. The runner
runner image was added over here. You
can see this is the Ubuntu image. Why
Ubuntu? Because you mentioned Ubuntu and
you can see the version and everything
of Ubuntu over here. Right? GitHub
token, meaning permissions were given uh
because the code needs to be checked
out.
And then you can see over here the code
was checked out. You can see the code
was checked out from
uh the GitHub and this completed the job
name called build. Okay? And here you
can see
uh the actions were run. Okay, so this
checkout actions was run. Okay, then you
had uh run one-line script. So, echo
hello world was run. Run a multi-line
script. So, you can see multi-line
script was also executed. And then you
had post actions run. So, post job
cleaner was being done. Everything was
cleaned up and then you have
the complete job. Okay, cleaning up
orphan processes. So, once this entire
file was executed in an automated way,
what happened is uh you know, uh the
cleanup was automatically done. We have
not defined the cleanup steps, by the
way. Let me tell you. And the job was
also marked as complete. And you can see
how it was executed. You can see
everything all the logs over here. These
are actually logs. You can search for
logs as well.
Okay? So, it's totally up to you. And
you can uh like you'll see all the jobs
over here on the left-hand side and you
can switch between jobs. So, this is for
the job build.
You can see usage over here. I saw what
sort of usage happened like what all was
used. You can see over here. If you
click on build,
you're going to see oops. So, if you go
to usage, you're going to see like 4
seconds of run time. If you go to the
workflow file, you're going to see the
workflow file as well that triggered
this.
Okay? So, all the things you can see
over here and then you can go back and
see uh like under all workflows, you can
see this workflow triggered uh the run.
Okay?
Now, one thing I would like to mention
is if you go inside this run over here,
the workflow run, the logs that you see
against all the, uh,
all the jobs over here, these logs are
very useful for debugging. These are
heart, heart over here, I should say,
okay? So, you you should have the habit
of seeing these logs, okay? And you
should know how you should check them,
how you should read them. They're very
simple to read, nothing complex, but if
you have a complex pipeline, you might
see a lot more information over here.
This is a simple pipeline, and see the
amount of information it's generating,
okay? You can come to CI again, and, uh,
here,
under CI, so not under all workflows,
all workflows, uh, if you're on on all
workflows, just go to your workflow, and
here you're going to see run workflow
button.
Okay, so you can also trigger this
workflow manually. Why? Because if you
go to the code that you've written, this
workflow triggers on three events. One
is if whenever there is a push on
working branch, whenever there is a pull
on working branch, and workflow dispatch
has been added over here, and if you've
added workflow dispatch, it shows you
this button over here, using which you
can trigger this workflow manually,
okay? So, if you don't want any sort of
manual triggers for a particular
workflow that you've defined or for for
a particular pipeline that you've
defined, you have to get rid of this. If
you remove this, this is not going to
come in, because it's showing you, see?
This workflow has workflow dispatch
event trigger, which means you can
dispatch it manually. So, I'm going to
come over here, you can dispatch it
manually, so I'll select the branch
where I want to run this, I'll say run
the workflow. And you can see a workflow
run has been successfully requested, and
if you go to all workflows, there will
be a run, and you can see this is
running now, okay? It's in process. You
can go inside, and by the time we
clicked on it, it actually got executed.
7 seconds it took. And if you click on
this, you're going to see all the, uh,
updates over here, like we saw for the
previous run. So, you're going to see
all the workflow runs.
You can have multiple pipelines defined,
like for example you can have 10
pipelines defined for different sort of
trigger scenarios. So right now the CI
is being triggered by blank. yaml which
we have just defined. You can have
different pipelines with different names
and that do different jobs. Okay, so
this is how GitHub actions work and this
is one of the
like demonstrations over here. You can
click on runners and see all the runners
over here zero available runners right
now self-hosted runners you can have
self-hosted runner over here. Okay, but
the major part I would like to show you
is like we created a workflow and this
folder automatically got added. Right?
And within this there is a file that got
added. Now these files do not exist on
our local machine. So if you come over
here, okay, I'm on the right branch. Let
me open the terminal. Oops. Let me open
the terminal over here. Okay, and if I
say
get status over here, I'm on this
working branch. The branch where I have
we have created this workflow. Right?
But I don't see any sort of you know,
dot GitHub folder and all the workflows
that we created. So what I can do is I
can say get pull. Okay, because this
version of local
the version that I have locally is not
in sync with the one now I have on
remote because I have made use of UI to
create certain files and folders as
well. So I'll just say get pull. And
this is going to pull everything and you
can see now I have this dot GitHub
folder and blank as well over here. I
can make any sort of changes over here
and I can push the things and whenever I
push, okay, it's going to trigger the
workflow again as we defined. Right? I
hope this has been useful and I hope you
all have been able to follow along
with me so far. Okay.
Uh
If you're working with Visual Studio
Code, you must be aware of the concept
of extensions. So extensions are
like they are like plugins that you can
install onto your Visual Studio Code and
then enhance your experience. So, I do
use a lot of extensions and when I was
using CI/CD
I I got the suggestion. So, it's likely
if you are
making use of CI/CD for the first time,
GitHub Actions, you're going to get uh
this kind of a suggestion over here
where it's asking you to install the
extension. So, you can click over here
and you can click on install and you can
see this is the extension that I'm
adding and it's usually helpful to add
extensions. So, you can see over here.
Uh this is basically an extension. Okay,
let me hide this. So, this is an
extension for GitHub Actions for
uh this and if you come over here,
you're going to see all the workflows
over here, the current branch and
everything. So, it gives you a nice UI
sort of thing over here within Visual
Studio Code itself. So, if you plan to
make use of GitHub Actions a lot, okay,
I would highly recommend this extension.
And here you can see this uh little icon
has come up on the left-hand side. Uh
GitHub Actions and you can see over here
all the workflows. And you need to sign
in to GitHub, of course. Uh and uh once
you sign in to GitHub, you're going to
see all the actions. So, just click on
sign in to GitHub
and it's going to ask you like
do you want to allow uh this particular
extension to do this? So, I'll just say
allow.
So, it took me to browser and it
finished the entire authentication uh
setup, okay, authorization setup with
GitHub and then it uh brought me back to
Visual Studio Code and now I can see all
my branches, workflows, and everything.
You can see over here. Okay.
Uh on the current branch, I have these
two uh like these two workflows that I
have executed. This is one uh workflow
that exists. So, everything you'll see
over here. Okay, so you can make use of
this. This is helpful if you plan to
make use of GitHub Actions a lot. I
would highly recommend.
Now, what I would want to do here is I
would want to create a uh GitHub Actions
or second pipeline, basically, uh from
the Visual Studio Code. And here, I'm
going to come over here and like you
know, all our pipelines reside in
.github workflows. So, I'm going to come
over here and create a new file. And uh
I can call this file as second uh dot
YAML. Okay. Something like this. Okay.
So, this is created now and uh what we
can do over here is I'm going to mention
name.
Now, name of this is uh I'll call this
as second like so. Okay. And second CI,
maybe. You can call this as second CI
like so. Okay. This is name. I can say
on Okay. So, it's suggesting me over
here Okay. What all I can add, but I
will just have a push over here. So, I'm
just going to get rid of this over here.
Like so. And uh then over here, I'm
going to say jobs. And then here, I'm
going to say Oops. So, here, I'm not
going to add all of this. So, I'm going
to say jobs build.
And I'm going to say runs on Ubuntu
latest. Oops.
So, builds run on Ubuntu latest. Okay.
And it has generated some code for me.
Okay. So, here you can see steps.
So, I'm not going to make use of this
actions over here, the pre-built actions
that we used in the previous code. I'm
just going to make use of uh name of the
step and then I'm going to have this
command executed over here. Like so.
Okay. This is done and Okay. It's
suggesting me something. So, this is
done. And uh yeah, we have our second CI
also written over here. It is going to
trigger on push. What I'm going to do is
I'm going to come over here to the
terminal. Okay. New terminal. And I'm
going to say
And here, what I'm going to do is I'm
going to say git add. So, I'm going to
add everything to git. I'm going to say
git status. So, you can see uh this new
file is added. Okay. And I'm going to
say git commit {hyphen} EM. I'm going to
add the message as uh second pipeline.
Okay?
And I'm going to say push.
Now, the moment I say push, you will see
this trigger the workflow here.
Uh right now here, you just had one
workflow. Okay, now you see second
workflow, and both the workflows are
being triggered over here. You can see.
This was
pushed, okay, first of all, and now it's
running over here. So, let me
like refresh over here. And you can see
over here for second CI. If you go
inside second CI over here, this is our
second CI, and it just got executed. So,
this is just This is the file that we
just created. Okay? And uh as you can
see over here, uh you can see.
Right? So, this this
This is what we defined, right? So, we
first set up the job, okay? Uh this This
is actually we have not not uh said it
to We have not asked it to set up a job,
but it did it by itself because we have
defined the job. And here you can see
uh this is coming in from the second
workflow, and like the cleanup was done,
right? So, this say hello is one of the
steps over here.
If you see, say hello is one of the
steps, and that is what you're seeing
over here.
Right? So, just try to map whatever
you're seeing on the UI with the file
that you see, okay? And just go back and
see
uh Now, you should see two runs over
here. Why two runs? This This should
also run because you did a push to the
repository. So, the earlier pipeline
should also run, the one that you had
initially, and the second pipeline
should also run. So, CI pipeline and
second pipeline both got executed.
Right? I hope this is making sense, and
uh I hope you all are able to follow
along.
Now, what I would say is
uh I would want to show you a little bit
uh complex file, okay, with the actual
stages of developers that they see in
the real pipeline. So, I have uh along
with this uh lecture, you would find an
attachment of a text file, and this is
that text file that you see. Okay? So,
here you can see the let me zoom out a
bit. Okay, this is the actual pipeline
that has been created. You can see real
dev
CI demo.
Okay, this is triggered on push in pull.
And this is the name of the job, CI
pipeline, and it runs on Ubuntu. This is
the runner. And here you have multiple
steps. So, step one is check out the
code. Okay? So, it's it's going to like
check out the code over here. Then step
two you have over here, which is going
to install the dependencies. So, it is
installing the dependencies. It is
installing Java, Node, and Python
dependencies. Okay? And we are not
actually installing the dependencies,
but we are just making use of echo over
here. Okay? In real, you will have the
actual commands to install the
dependencies. Okay?
Then you have step three, which is
running a linter over here. Okay? So, it
it is it will check for any sort of
issues in your code. And then you have a
step for building the application. So,
here after running the linter, it is
going to build the application. So, for
example, if it's Java application, it is
going to run this. If it's Node, it is
going to run this. Now, I'm not actually
running the commands. Ideally, you
should be running the commands like NPM
run build over here. But I'm just
running echo.
I'm just printing the commands. I'm not
actually running because we don't have a
project yet. We are not working on the
project yet in terms of pipelines. And
then you have step five, which is
running the test. Okay? So, you can run
the test. Then packaging the artifacts
basically into .jar or .zip or build
folders, whatever you want to. Okay? And
then you upload the artifact somewhere.
Okay? So, artifact is uploaded somewhere
and this is this is very this is how you
upload. Okay? And then you build the
image. So, image will be built and this
is how you build the image. Okay? Step
one, step two, and step three.
Remember these commands are not being
executed in real. I'm just printing
these commands using echo. Okay? So,
ideally you should be running these
commands. Okay? But we are not working
with the app, so that is why I've not
mentioned the actual commands. And then
you will be pushing the
code to remote Docker Hub or Docker
registry. And then here you have a
failure demo. So, how does a failure
looks like? That is what we are
simulating. So, what I will do is I
would recommend copying this, coming
over here and
adding a new file third.yml,
something like this. And just paste
this. Okay? Once you're done with this,
just save it. And just come over here
and just commit uh third pipeline. So,
I'm going to say third of a file.
Like so. Oops, I forgot to add.
Okay, get add and then you add third
pipeline and then you say push. And the
moment you say push, you're going to see
uh third pipeline appear over here. You
can see real dev CI demo only and you
can see this is being triggered right
now. Okay, it's running right now. You
can go and actually see how it's
running. You can see uploading, it's
uploading build artifacts. It's it did
all of this and then here you have
intentional failure.
So, you can check all the logs over
here. You can see this gives you a good
gist. So, setting up the job, you know,
you you check out your code over here.
Okay, on the runner. And then uh
installing dependencies happened. So,
you can see all the echo statements that
you had added.
In real, you would be actually running
these commands. So, you won't see these
one-line statements. You would see logs,
really long logs over here.
Right? And then you have lint code. And
then if you scroll down here, you we
have failure simulation. So, this is how
a failure simulation looks like. I
wanted to show this to you on the UI.
And here you can have a failure handler
as well. Okay?
Uh and uh here you have a post checkout
code. Okay?
And here it completed the job. So, this
entire thing, this is how it works and
here you have this failure message
coming in.
So, if you go to
if you go back over here, and if you
click on all workflows, you can see all
the other workflows executed
successfully, but this thing, like the
third pipeline, this got failed. Okay?
So, you can see over here
with one push, we did one push right
now, right? We
We added a new file over here. We did a
push right now. How many pipelines
should be executed when you are doing a
push
in our repository? Three pipelines
should be executed. So, this also runs
on push, this also runs on push, and
this also runs on push now, right? So,
if you come over here, you will see
these three pipelines have been
executed. You can see these three
pipelines have been executed.
Okay?
This third pipeline that you're seeing
over here, third pipeline as the title,
that is the name of the commit that is
causing the trigger.
Okay? So, this thing is the name of the
commit that is causing the trigger. This
is the actual name of the pipeline that
got executed.
You can see this is the name of the
pipeline that got executed. This is the
name of the pipeline that got executed.
So, for one single commit over here, you
can see three pipeline got executed. One
is real CI demo, other is the CI, and
second and and the last one is the
second CI. All three got executed, but
one failed. Why it failed? Because we
uh we purposely created a failure state
over there just to see how a failed
pipeline looks like. Okay? So, you can
see in the UI how it looks like. It
clearly gives you a glimpse of how it
failed. Okay? It shows you the
timestamp. So, all these three ran
exactly 2 minutes ago when we just
pushed the code.
Okay? I hope this is making sense, and I
hope you all had fun. So, just check out
this file in the attachment of this
particular lecture, and you should be
able to download and use it.
So, now is the time where we begin
talking about anatomy of a CI pipeline,
and we are going to go through a CI
pipeline, a sample one, and we'll
understand different components. This is
going to give you a good understanding
of the file again. So, here this is the
file that we are going to take a look
at. Okay? It is a simple CI pipeline
which includes the name, trigger, and
jobs along with state steps, okay?
So, first we'll talk about name. So,
this part of the CI pipeline uh is the
name part like it says, and uh the
purpose of the name is it's it it just
gives this pipeline a human-readable
label. And whenever you are working on
the Actions UI on uh the GitHub, so
you're going to see this name reflect
over there in the UI. And whatever name
you give, it does not have any effect on
the execution. Okay? So, whatever name
you can give. And the structure that we
are seeing over here of the CI pipeline,
this structure, this entire structure,
this is what is followed generally,
okay? So, majority uh like whatever code
you will see down the line, whether it's
on production or any sort of project,
and if it's making use of GitHub
Actions, you're going to see this kind
of code in this particular format. Okay?
So, that is why I've taken this example.
Yes, the uh files might look complex in
some projects if they might have a
different uh a lot of steps involved in
the pipeline. So, it might look a little
bit complex with a lot of steps, but the
structure remains this, okay?
So, like I said, name is nothing but a
uh human-readable label, okay? Which
gives you an understanding of what
uh the uh of of what the pipeline name
is, okay? It's basically like a identity
over here, right? Then you have the next
part, which is the on part, and this is
the trigger that uh can grow, okay? Now,
you here over here we have written the
trigger as push, which means if there is
anything pushed to the repository where
this action is being created,
it's going to trigger this particular
pipeline, okay? Now, you can have
multiple triggers over here. Like you
can have a push, pull request, you can
have workflow dispatch. You can have
multiple triggers in a single pipeline,
and you can design a workflow or a
pipeline to get triggered, uh and it
should it can listen to multiple events
is what I mean to say over here. Okay,
so so that's about on part. Then you
have this jobs part which actually does
the work. Okay, so it's it's like a
backbone of the pipeline over here that
you're writing. And
so the understanding of jobs over here
is jobs defined the unit of work. And
here whatever name you're giving, so
here I've mentioned build. So whatever
name you mentioned, this is a name of
the job. So this is like an identifier.
So on the UI you're going to see build
as one of the jobs and what happened in
that particular job. And you can have
multiple jobs in a particular pipeline
or in a particular file. That's
completely okay. Okay. Now I've
mentioned over here runs on. Okay, this
runs on
will make sure
that a machine is provisioned. It's
called a runner. It will be provisioned
for running this particular pipeline.
Okay. And a GitHub does the job of
providing a machine. Now the machine can
be a Linux machine. Here we are making
use of Ubuntu latest. And whatever logic
you've defined over here in the steps is
going to run on this particular machine
because you know, this is going to need
a little bit of computational power and
that is why a machine is needed. All
right, I hope this makes sense. Then you
have steps part, this part that you're
seeing over here. This is where you
define the work that is supposed to
happen. So this is where the actual
action happens.
Right? Now over here you can see there
is one step only. But in reality you can
have a pipeline with multiple steps of
course. But here you are having only one
step which says hello and it is running
this command over here. Right? It's
running the command it says echo hello
from the second workflow. Whatever you
want to add. You can say hello from the
pipeline or whatever you can you want to
run. You can add Linux command over here
and they will run. So this name is the
name of that particular step and run
defines the actual command that will get
triggered, okay?
So, you can see over here, run.
And here, in case of run, you can even
have uses over here. Okay, which is a
little bit
uses is basically you you will make use
of a predefined action. You will make
use of uses over here. But, it can be
run or uses. So, here I've shown the
example of run when you are executing a
command over here, okay? And each step
over here, so this is one step. Each
step is one unit of work or something
happens in that particular step. Okay?
And if there is any sort of failure in
any of the steps, the execution is
stopped. Okay? Now, here, whenever you
go through the CI pipelines, okay,
multiple versions of code, you're going
to see different syntaxes, okay, like
you're seeing on the screen.
But, trust me, different syntaxes have
same meaning, okay? It's just different
ways of writing things. So, here you're
seeing This is how you you're defining
trigger. So, here you're seeing the
trigger is being defined as on push.
Now, you can have multiple triggers this
way, on push, on pull, and you have a
colon over here. So, that's completely
okay. Here, you can have on push and you
can define branches as well here in the
brackets, okay? So, if you want to make
sure that you're listening to a
particular branch and not to the entire
repository. So, if a particular push
happens on this particular branch, only
then this trigger will be invoked, okay?
So, the YAML file over here. So, you're
defining this This is a YAML syntax. So,
YAML file allows multiple styles, and
GitHub supports all the valid forms,
okay,
forms of the code that you're writing
over here, okay? So, so yeah, that is
about
that This is about the anatomy of a CI
pipeline. Now, remember,
whenever you are seeing any sort of CI
pipeline, this is what it's going to
look like, the structure that we
discussed. This is what it's going to
look like, any sort of CI pipeline,
okay? This is a standard structure. Yes,
the code might be more or less, triggers
might be more or less depending on the
requirement, but the structure remains
the same. I hope this helped.
Now is the time we take a look at the
difference between running command
versus using actions. So, first thing I
would like to mention very clearly over
here, whenever you're writing steps in
the pipeline file, you know, every
single step will do some sort of work,
right? Or it's it's it it helps you
define unit of work, right? So, every
single step will do something and within
a step, you can only have two things.
One is you can run a command using run
or you can use a pre-built action. All
right? So, these are the only two things
that you can do in a single step. Now,
let's talk about running a command first
and then we will go to like using an
action, okay? So, what does run actually
mean? So, let us take a look at this
example. So, within a step, you're going
to define something like this. This is a
step called say hello.
And you within run label, you are having
echo and you're printing a message,
okay? Now, what this is allowing you to
do is it is basically allowing you to
run a Linux to run a command on the
terminal on a Linux machine. So, it is
telling that create a Linux machine and
run this command in its terminal. And
Linux machine is created using the
runner, okay? your provisioning. Now,
within that machine, you are running
this command. That is what this means
actually, right? So, run executes shell
commands, okay? You can uh use same
commands that you are you you are
running on shell in a Linux machine and
you can run it locally like this, okay?
And uh the syntax is also same as Linux
terminal because the runner that you're
provisioning is
uh is a Linux machine, okay?
And these are some examples of valid run
steps that exist over here. Okay, so you
can see you can execute mvn test. Uh
here I'm making use of Maven to test my
application. I can say npm install if
I'm making use of Node.js. I can say
docker build with a dot if I'm in the
directory where I want to uh like build
my application.
Uh you uh create an image and uh you can
also run Python using this command,
okay? You can see. So, these are all
valid commands and some examples that I
have pasted over here. So, key idea over
here behind the run command is it helps
you run your command on the runner that
you have provisioned. All right? That's
the significance of run command. Now,
this is the one way of defining a step.
Another way is by making use of a
pre-built action. And uh here you can
make use of uses key keyword over here,
right? So, here you can see the step.
Here I've mentioned the step name as
checkout code. And I've written uses
actions/
Right? So, what this says is this says
run a pre-built automation that has been
written by someone else. And where is
the automation? The automation is
actions/checkout. So, this is the actual
automation that you're invoking. Have
you written this? No, someone else has
written. So, this is like an importing a
library.
So, if you're writing code, let's say
you're writing Java code, you will
import a library into your Java
application to reuse a code or a snippet
of code that someone else has written
for you.
Right? Uh and this is true for all the
programming languages like Python,
Node.js. You can use a pre-built uh
written written piece of code that has
been written by someone else, right?
And you can do that uh using import
statements and all of that. You can
reuse the library. So, that is what uh
this
means over here. So, here
actions/checkout, we have not defined.
We are reusing someone else's logic. It
has been defined. It has been published
somewhere, and we are using, right? So,
we are not writing commands here, we are
just reusing logic. And
what are these defined actions? So, what
what are these predefined actions? So,
you will have this query as to what does
this predefined actions actually mean?
Who is defining this, right? So,
predefined actions are reusable
automation packages that have been
created, okay? Who creates this? They
have been written by GitHub themselves
or by the community and they've been
published, right? And they are
versioned. For example, here in the
example you saw, we have a version
checkout at the rate four. So, here you
these these packages or these actions
that have been defined are versioned and
you can refer to them using the version
name, right? Or the version number.
And then they're stored in the
repositories somewhere and they're
executed for you, right? So, this is
these are what predefined actions are
and some of the popular ones are these.
So, you'll see these being used a lot.
For example, you can check out your code
using actions checkout at the rate V4.
You can set up Java over here. So, this
is going to install Java over here.
You can, you know, log into Docker
registry using this. You can upload the
artifact over here, okay? So, you can do
all of this using these predefined uh
actions and they don't care how you work
initially, okay? And so, you don't care
how you are how they work over here
because it's defined by someone else.
You are just making use of them. You
know the end result that you will get.
For example, action/checkout will help
you check out the code on uh on your
runner that you have provisioned, okay?
Now, one question that generally
beginners have is why are we using
pre-built actions? Why can't we write
our own code or own commands, right? Uh
why can't we use just run? Why does this
uses even exist? So, one major reason is
uh like you will have to do a lot of
work there if you try to write your own
code. And let Let you an example over
here. So, let's take checkout as an
example. Checkout as in you're checking
out the code you've written onto a
machine, right? So, what would you do is
you will have to run a series of
command, right? You'll have to run git
clone, okay? And you you will have to
write a lot of command. You'll have to
authenticate with GitHub, uh store the
code somewhere. So, Git GitHub says,
"Don't write so much of code or so many
commands over here. Simplify. This is a
common use case. Everybody a lot of
developers everybody out there would
want to check out some code uh using
this CI pipeline, right? To build an
image or to
um like whatever you want to do, right?
So, here what GitHub says is don't write
so much of code. I'll just give you one
action that will cover all the series of
step, okay? So, so so that is what it
does. And you know, checkout process is
not generally easy. Checkout involves
like authentication, tokens, uh pull
request handling, shallow clones. Uh you
will have submodules, some sort of
security rules that you will have to
deal with. So, all of this comes into
play and that's too complex and risky to
write every time, right? So, what GitHub
says is it says just use this action and
it'll do the job for you because it has
everything written in it depending on
the scenarios, right? And uh the key
idea over here is you are actually
uh you know, uh using uses over here and
a pre-built action along with uses to
handle complex, common, and error-prone
task that you as a developer don't want
to focus on. You just want to focus on
your business logic, right? Not on how
you can uh clone your code from GitHub,
right? So, that's what it is and uh
runner
has no code by default. This is one
important thing that you want to that
you should understand. Runner, whenever
you provision a machine or a runner,
GitHub is going to create a brand new
machine and that machine has no project
code. And whenever you try to run
something like this, okay? It is not
going to list anything for you or run
anything for you over here because there
is no code on the machine. So, if you're
running LS, it's it's not going to show
you any sort of output, right? So, so
that's something that you should be
aware of, okay? Now, one thing I would
like to mention is can run and uses be
used together? So, absolutely no,
because as you can see over here, this
piece of code wherein we have defined a
step, this is a bad step, and I'm making
use of run and uses both in the single
step. So, this is invalid. This is not
allowed. And a step can do only one
thing. Either it can run commands or it
can execute an action. So, either of the
both you can do. And the right way of
doing things is like this. So, you have
this one step over here wherein you're
checking out the code, and the other
step is wherein you're building the
project. Okay? So, this is absolutely
valid over here, okay? Now, let's talk
about run and uses over here. So, you
should use run when the command is
specific to your project, you are
controlling the logic and it's simple
and transparent, right? So, if you're
doing something that's simple and
transparent, only then you should make
use of run. But, you should use uses
when the task is common. Like, for
example, checking out the code, right?
That's common. Installing Java, that is
also common. Installing Python, that's
common task. So, you should use the
action there. Security matters. If if
you have something wherein your security
matters to you, and someone has written
much more secure code, the setup is
complex. For example, installing Java
can get complex. So, it's best you use
the action rather than doing it manually
by running the commands. And some best
practices already exist, even then you
will make use of use over here.
Right? So, so this is something you
should understand, okay? So, you should
use run when you want to build your
application, and there are some custom
build commands that you want to run. You
want to test your applications, and
there will be some custom test command
that you might want to run. If if you
want to run some custom script, debug
script, so you can use run.
But, you should use uses when you want
to check out code, because it's a common
sort of a scenario that is pre-handled.
Uh if you want to set up a language
runtime, then too you should use uses.
If you want to log in to uh like cloud
or registry, like log in to Docker Hub
or something like that, then you should
use uses over here. Uh if you want to
upload artifacts, you should use uses,
okay? So, I hope this is making sense,
uh the clear difference between uh
running using run and use uses, okay? I
hope this has been useful.
All right. So, now is the time where we
start talking about ENV, which is
environment variables, and the secrets.
So, I already have few pipelines written
over here. And what I'm going to do is
I'm going to like just comment out the
events over here. And I'll make sure all
uh have this workflow dispatch. Now, why
am I doing workflow dispatch? So, you
can see over here the documentation.
Workflow dispatch event allows you to
manually trigger a workflow run.
I don't want all these pipelines. So,
see, I'm writing quite a few CI
pipelines, right? I've got quite a few
pipelines over here.
And I don't want to trigger all of them
when I commit something or push
something, right? So, I'm commenting out
over here this thing. And uh workflow
dispatch is what I'm adding over here.
So, I'll just copy workflow dispatch.
I'll go to uh like second over here,
right? And here also on instead of on
push, I'm going to say workflow dispatch
like so. And instead of third, I'm going
to like comment all out, and I'm going
to say workflow dispatch.
Okay.
So, this is how it would be. Uh and on
blank, here we have a workflow dispatch.
I'll save this. Okay. So, all the files
have been saved.
Right? And uh we have this set, right?
Now, what I will do is here I have this
second CI.
All right? And uh what I will do is I'll
copy the second CI, and let us use this
as an example
uh where uh you know, we talk about be
variables and secrets. So, here I'll say
rename.
And here I'm going to say
ENV and I'm going to say uh
or underscore secrets, something like
this, okay? ENV secrets and inputs also
we are going to talk about. So, I'll
just add this over here as a line. You
can just say uh you know you can just
mention whatever uh file name you want
to have, okay? Demo CI ENV and I'm going
to say ENV secrets, something like this,
okay?
So, I've added this and now I'll save
this, okay?
Now, what are environment variables,
okay? Or we call it as ENV. What are
they? So, these are normal environment
variables that you might want to use in
your pipelines for any sort of code,
okay? So, that is what it is. Now, there
is also something called as uh secrets,
which is secure environment variables.
We will come to that in a bit, okay?
Now, first let's talk about the ENV
variables. So, here you can see I have
this step over here. So, what I'm going
to do is I am going to like duplicate
this step, okay? And I'll come over
here.
And oops, so here I'm going to add this
step. Instead of say hello, I'm going to
say uh install something or uh try ENV,
whatever you want to say over here and
you can say echo run. And uh I let's say
in this particular step I want to make
use of ENV variables, okay? Or
environment variables. So, I can say ENV
over here.
Okay, like so, ENV. And I can say colon
and here I will say app_env
colon demo, like so.
Okay? This is what I've added and here I
can say environment
and I can say colon dollar
app_env,
like so. Oops. app_env, like so.
So, this is done, okay? I'm getting a uh
mark over here.
Okay, so this is because okay, here I
need to add
echo hello.
So, I think we can get rid of these
codes over here.
Okay, now it should okay, I'm still
nested mapping not allowed.
I'm still getting the problem and I
think I've identified and understood the
issue. Here the problem is you have
added colon over here. So, I'm getting
rid of colon, okay, because colon
is having a meaning here, okay, you're
making use of colon here, too. So, it's
getting it's throwing an error, okay, so
I have just added that. I'll save this
and uh, now what I can do is I can go to
the terminal over here, new terminal.
Okay, and I can simply push the code and
let us see how this works. So, what we
have done is we have defined a
environment variables over here, right,
which is called app ENV and I'm using
that here in this particular step.
Now, what I can do is I'll say get
add and I'll say get commit
hyphen
Okay,
uh, new ENV CI over here and I can say
push, okay. I'll just push this and let
us see what happens here. So, I'll just
come to the actions tab here
and uh, here you can see ENV secrets
here, okay. All right, so this is
basically on workflow dispatch. So, I'll
just run this workflow. Let us see how
this works.
Okay, so this is running now.
Okay.
And you can see this is running and I'll
just click on this. Let us go here.
And within build, let me click here.
And it says install, okay. So, here this
is the thing that we defined, install.
Okay, so you can see over here, it's
saying echo
app ENV.
And here, in fact, you can see here here
you are having the output environment
demo. So, this is the actual output.
Demo is coming in from here. You can see
the demo defined over here. Now,
whatever value you change over here will
be reflected here.
Right? I hope this is making sense. We
can keep this
Oh, so we are running working on this,
so we can keep this one trigger on push,
right? All rest all are on workflow
dispatch, but this one is on push. And
now I can change the value to demo uh
new, okay? Demo underscore new, and I
can simply have a commit now, okay? I
can say push, and here you're going to
see the commit, okay? So, let me go
back.
And here you should see one more run
happening, okay?
Let me go to all workflows, okay? You
can see new ENV CI, and here if you go
over here,
if you tap,
here install,
okay? You're going to see
demo new. So, this demo new is the value
that we have changed. Now, what is the
use of having,
uh you know, this sort of environment
variable? See, environment variables are
plain configuration values. You might
want to switch uh the environment in
your code or any sort of things, okay?
And you might want to use it like for
the configuration that you might want to
provide for your application that you
are running. And generally,
if you are making use of such
environment, okay? You hardcode the
value over here in the code, and this is
getting pushed to the GitHub repository.
So, here you should only make use of
things that are not sensitive. Right?
You will make use of things that are not
sensitive. Now, the question comes is,
"Hey, uh so, if I want to deal with
sensitive data, you know, like DB
passwords, I cannot hardcode my
environment variable like this, right?
So, for example, let's say you're
building an application. Here you have
the command to build the application,
right? So, you might want to uh so, you
you you will say, "Okay, the app in
ENV." Instead of app ENV, you will say
uh ENV,
or you can say app ENV, and this is,
let's say, dev environment, okay? You're
compiling the app for dev environment.
And now you over here, you will see
db_password.
Okay, now this is database password over
here that you want to add as an
environment variable. Okay, let's say
you will you will say demo@123. Now this
password is actually not sensitive. It's
sensitive data. It's sensitive data, but
right now it's not being handled in a
sensitive way. You have hardcoded it in
your source code. Now whoever commits
the code, everyone is going to see this.
How do you deal with this? Okay. So, the
answer is secrets. So here you're making
use of environment variables. These are
environment variables, app env and db
password.
There is another concept called secrets
wherein what you can do is you define
the values in the UI. UI meaning over
here. So you come over here.
Okay, you go to let's say settings. So
I'll just open settings in a new tab.
And you come over here. And here under
actions, okay sorry, not under actions,
but you come over here. And here under
sec- secrets and variables, you go to
actions. And here is where you can
define like environment secrets. Okay?
Environment secrets, repository secrets,
organization secrets, you can define
this. And these can be consumed in the
code. Now over here you can have
sensitive information added. Okay? So,
this is what secret is. So what I can do
is instead of hardcoding the database
password like this, okay? I don't want
to hardcode my password this way. What I
will do is I will say dollar
colon two times, I'll say secrets
.db_password
like so. Okay? This is what I have
added. Now what I'm going to do is I'm
going to make use of I'm going to go to
the UI. Okay, I'll save this. And I'll
say environment app env using
Okay, using dollar db_ Oops, sorry. So
I'll say dollar db_password.
Dollar db_password like so. Okay, this
is what I've done.
Now I'll take this DB password. I'll
come over here. Okay.
I'll go to repository secrets and here
I'll say new repository secret. I'll
define the secret name. And I'll say my
database
password like so at the rate of 123 and
I'll say add the secret.
Okay, I've added the secret. And this is
done and now what I can do is I'll come
over here and I'll just push this code.
Okay, so I'll say get commit. And I'll
say push.
Okay, the moment we push, let me come to
actions over here.
Okay, you should see a new workflow
running. Did we push it? It got pushed.
Okay. So you should see a new workflow
running. Okay. So here this is it
already ran. Okay, so if you click on
this, if you go over here
and if you go to install
install is our step name. So here you're
going to see environment dev.
Okay.
Environment is dev. Right? Because app
env is dev using the database password.
So we are using and you can see the
database password is not printed. Can
you see? You have got three stars over
here. Why you have got three stars?
Can you tell me why you have got three
stars? Because it has been defined as a
secret. Okay. So you have defined a
secret over here. Okay, and you're
consuming it over here this way. So it's
a secret. You can see over here.
Right? So it's a secret that you have
defined and even if you try to print it,
anyone tries to print it, it's not going
to work. So this way what you've done is
you have gotten rid of the sensitive
information or sensitive data that you
are willing to use in your application
like database passwords, any sort of
token, anything, anything that is
sensitive, you can use it this way. So
GitHub will encrypt it. You cannot see
it again. Nobody can see it again. If if
you try to access it, you cannot see it
again. It's encrypted now. If you try to
edit it, you won't be able to see it.
Can you see? You cannot see it. You just
have to add a new value.
Right? So, GitHub encrypts it. You
cannot see it again. And if you log it
using the CI pipeline, I'm trying to log
it over here. If you try to log it,
you've seen what we see. You You do not
see any output. You just see a masked
value.
Now, here in the UI also, you will see
multiple places where you can define
secrets. One is environment secret. So,
this is
a secret that is tied to the GitHub
environment. Then, you have repository
secret. If you want to make use of
secret at a repository level, like you
want that secret to be accessible only
to that particular repository. For
example, I want a secret to be
accessible only over here.
So, I have to define
a secret over here. Okay? Because this
won't be used across other repository.
It's only specific to this repository.
Okay?
Then, you can have organization secret.
Okay? Organization secret as in this
secret will be there at organizational
level. Okay? So, this is how you can
define the secret. And you can consider
it in your application.
Now, ENV values can be also at different
levels. Okay? So, here what we have done
is we have defined these ENV values at
step level.
Okay? We have defined at it at a step
level. Meaning, this these ENV values
are only
available to these this step only. Now,
what you can do is you can copy this.
And you can define a ENV at a global
level as well. Okay? So, here if you
come,
you can see global level ENV. Okay? Let
me go over here. This is an example of
global level ENV here.
Okay?
So, if you press enter, you can see
global
global app ENV. Okay? And it's
global
diff.
Global hyphen diff. Okay? This is a
global ENV means it is available to all
the jobs and all the steps. Okay? What
you can even do is you can define
a
job level ENV. So, here you have job
build and you have said it runs on. So
basically under the job name here
under the job name at runs on level, you
can paste this.
And you can say
this is also a ENV. Okay, so you can say
job app ENV and here instead of global,
you can say job dev.
Like so. Okay, this is done. This is a
job level ENV. Okay, so we have seen
workflow level ENV. This is global
meaning workflow level. Global meaning
workflow level, not outside the
workflow.
This is job level ENV. Right? And then
you have a step level ENV which we have
already seen over here. Okay, this is
step level ENV. This is available only
to this particular step. Okay, so you
can say environment app ENV using DB
password. I've added DB password. I'll
add comma.
I'll say what is the name of the global
ENV? I'll say global app ENV.
Okay.
Global app ENV. I'll add a comma again.
And I'll say
I also want to make use of
job level app ENV.
Something.
Okay.
So this is done.
I'll commit this. I'll push this. So now
you should see the output over here. Let
me go back here.
I'll just go back.
You can see this is running. I'll go to
build.
And by the time I click, it's going to
run. Okay, so it's running install.
And you can see over here
environment dev using global dev and job
level dev. Okay, so both the global
global meaning workflow level. Okay,
I think global you might get confused
that it's available across every
workflow, right? That's not the case.
It's globally available means it will be
available
within that particular workflow. So that
is what it is.
So I hope you all have been able to
follow along and I hope this has been
useful.
All right. So, now it's time we talk
about the concept of inputs, okay? Now,
see, whenever you run a pipeline, it
runs on a machine that is provisioned
over here and it's called a runner,
right? It runs on this particular
machine and once this pipeline execution
is completed, this machine is destroyed.
Destroyed as in you don't have access to
anything that happened on this machine,
right? Now, there will be scenarios
wherein, you know, you run some sort of
test cases, you generate certain files,
you might have test reports that might
get generated. You might want to save
them for for accessing later on,
right? But, if you have it have it on
the machine, see, those files will be
generated on the machine and if the
workflow ends and the machine is
destroyed, then you won't have access to
those particular files. So, it's best
that you save it, okay? So, there is a
action for the same, okay? So, this
action name is upload artifact. So,
using this, this is a pre-existing
action. So, just come to
github.com/actions,
okay? This is github.com/actions over
here,
right? You will see all the automated
GitHub workflows and you scroll down
over here and you can search for You can
see there are so many workflows over
here, right? Toolkit, all of this. So
many workflows. Set up Python, set up
Java, these are all workflows
like automated workflows or actions that
you can use. If you want to set up Java
onto your
machine, the runner that gets
provisioned If you want to set up Java
there, you can do that. Set up Python,
you can do that, okay? So, here I'll say
upload artifact.
Okay, upload artifact. So, this is quite
popular and very widely used. If you
click on this, what this is going to do
is if you scroll down, okay? It
basically will upload
things that you provide to them, okay?
So, okay, I don't see any documentation
over here of what it does, but that's
fine. You can see over here usage. Okay.
So, this is how you use it. You can see,
this is how you use it. It's a a
predefined workflow or action that
exists. So, this is how you define it.
And yes, it expects a list of
parameters. Okay. Now, these list of
parameters that you're giving is known
as input input. I'm sorry. These list of
parameters is known as an input.
So, what are the parameters? Here, it
accepts name. And this defines the name
of the artifact to upload. The default
name given over here is artifact itself.
If you want a custom name, you can
define. Okay? And then the path. So,
path is nothing but the file path
directory or a wildcard pattern that you
can mention of what you want to upload.
Okay. So, for example, if you're
generating test cases,
right? If you're generating test
reports, you run a command, okay? You
How would you run a command? You would
come over here. You would define
something like this and you would run a
command to run the test cases. Now, next
step what you can do is you can make use
of this action and you can upload the
test cases that are generated. So, you
will have a specific path where the test
cases or the test reports have been
generated. So, what you can do is you
can mention the path over here. So,
basically in this particular path, you
go and up get it uploaded. That is how
it defines. And these are all the
parameters that have been defined. Okay.
So, you can see over here.
Uh this is given very clearly. So, if
you want to make use of this artifact,
you can use this. What I will do is I'll
copy this, okay? And uh we can actually
define a new step over here, like so.
I'll copy this.
Okay.
And uh here
I'll say
uh instead of install, I'll say upload
artifact demo, okay? Upload demo,
something like this, okay? And uh okay,
this is giving a red mark. Why is it
giving a red Okay. So, indentation
issue. I'll just bring this
over here, like so.
Oops.
Okay, this is done. Okay, upload demo is
the name and then I'll say uses like so.
And I'll say colon.
And I'll say here we have mentioned what
is what what is that we have mentioned
uses.
And this is the thing. Okay, so I've
mentioned upload and this it it makes
use of this actions artifact. I'll save
it over here.
And I'll say name.
Okay, and then I'll say path like so.
Okay, so name and path both we have to
define. Now, what is the name? I'll say
build
artifacts
demo like so.
Okay, and here I'll say so you can
mention any path that you want to
define, but I'll say dot over here. So
whatever is there in the current path,
just upload that. Okay, are we checking
out any sort of code over here? Uh no,
so we are not checking out any sort of
code. Okay.
Okay, so
what I will do is I will have one more
uh step defined over here. So I'll just
just copy this over here. Okay, so
before
finding this, I'll just have one more
step and instead of install, I'll say
create
demo
file. So I'll just create a demo file
using some real Linux commands and I'll
say run over here. Now, I want to run
multiple commands in a single step,
multiple commands. So what I will do is
I can add a pipe over here. Just go to
next step and I'll say echo and I'll say
hello from CI pipeline.
Okay, and I'll
take this as an input for demo.txt like
so. Okay, and I'll say echo
file created successfully.
So I'm I've used pipe symbol. Pipe is
basically used if you want to run
multiple Linux command in a single step.
Right? So that is what I've done. And
basically whatever is there in the
current folder will get uploaded. Okay,
so what I will do is I'll say uh get
commit
and I'll say push like so.
Okay, let us see what happens. So, I'll
come over here. Let us go
behind uh like one step and let us see
new ENVCI. I'll click on this.
And here, if you see, you can see the
artifacts over here. All right? You can
see the artifact. So, you're seeing the
artifact and if you click on this
artifact, if I click
Okay.
Let me click. Okay, so it's downloading
it. You can see it's downloading. So,
I'll just download this.
So, I do have downloaded and I have
extracted the zip file and you can see
over here I have demo.txt which has this
text in it.
Okay, can you see? It has this text in
it. And this is the exact text, okay,
that we had given over here in the file.
So, this file is actually created and we
have now access to this thing. Okay? So,
so yes, this is what I want to
demonstrate and now this is available
only in this run. Earlier, this was not
available. So, if you go to the previous
runs, like for example, the very
previous run, you won't see any sort of
artifacts over here. Can you see any
sort of artifacts? No. But if you come
back and if you go to the latest run,
you will see this artifact over here.
You can see artifacts produced during
run time and this is the uh this is the
basically name of the artifact. Okay?
So, this way you can download, you can
even delete it from here and you can do
various things. If you click on this,
okay, you would see
uh upload was done. You can see here
upload was done. You can see here the
demo file was created. You can see.
Right? Install step is also run over
here. Okay? The demo file is created and
you get the link also to download the
artifact. Okay? Can you see the entire
process over here?
So, this entire process is happening
because of this action. So,
it provided the path, artifact nam name
and the directory input path that you've
given is was validated. Then the file
was being uploaded, then uploaded bytes
were being printed, then finished
uploading.
Uh then you could see a lot of steps and
then zip was created and then the URL
was given to you, okay? And the job was
marked as complete. So, if you want to
save anything from the execution steps,
you can make use of this particular uh
action over here.
So, there are quite a few things we
picked up from this video we learned new
in this video. One
is how you can provide input
in uh GitHub Actions. See, whenever you
are writing any sort of code, input can
be important, right? Uh you you are
using an action and this action required
input. So, we have given inputs in the
form of with. We we have made use of
with over here. And we have said name
and path are two inputs that we want to
give over here. So, these two inputs we
have given. Name says the name of the
artifact and path is basically telling
from which path you need to uh pick up
the files, okay? This is one. We also
understood about this upload artifact in
the process. So, upload artifact is a
pre-built GitHub Actions workflow that
you can make use of. It is used for
saving the files that would rather get
deleted from uh the runner, basically,
or the runner runner machine, okay? So,
that is what we have defined. And uh
yeah, there are these were the concepts
that we learned and we also saw the file
that uh got uploaded and we also
downloaded and checked it out. So, this
is very useful. In fact, I'll tell you
if you run test reports, any sort of
test cases, any sort of logs you
generate, you can get it exported this
way or you can get it saved uh onto
GitHub this way. And uh instead of
losing it on the run runner machine,
it's best you save it. I hope this has
been useful.
Whenever you create pipelines, these
pipelines can have multiple jobs.
And jobs run in an isolated manner
generally, but you will have requirement
or you may have requirement wherein one
job is dependent on another. Okay? Now,
you can define dependencies in the
pipeline file. So, so what I'm going to
do is I am going to create one more job
over here, okay? And
this is build job, okay?
Which has this step. So, I'll just copy
this over here. I'll just scroll down.
And I'll just come here and I'll add
this job over here. Okay, now instead of
build, I'll name this job as test.
It runs on Ubuntu latest, okay?
And I'll just get rid of this ENV over
here, okay? And here it says test job is
what I'll tell over here. I'll mention
over here. This step name is test job.
And echo is over here. I'll say
uh a test job, okay? Something like
this.
So, let's say this is a test phase,
okay? This is built over here. So, once
the application is built, I want to run
certain test cases on this.
Right? Now, what I would want to do is
these are two separate jobs, right? They
are not dependent on each other. They
will run in an independent fashion. But
let's say I want to run test job only
after the build job is complete.
Right? Test should only happen once the
building is complete. So, what I would
do is I would come over here and I would
have the needs keyword. I'll mention
needs over here and I'll say build.
Okay? Something like this. Now, what
this will do is this tells that, "Hey,
for test to run, it is dependent on
build. So, wait until the build job is
complete." And I'll show this to you.
So, I'll just open the terminal and I'll
say uh
let's commit. And I'll say
push over here.
And I'll come over here.
Let us go back.
And let us see the job being executed.
It's being queued. And if you come over
here, you can see build is running. This
is not started yet. Build is running
still, and this is not started test. Now
the test is running. So you could
clearly see build was run first, and
then the test was run.
So it waited for 4 seconds because this
build
took 4 seconds, and after that only test
started. Right? And you're seeing over
here test job, and this was printed.
Okay?
Test job, right? So this is the
importance of needs keyword. With needs,
you can define the dependencies in the
pipeline. Right? And yeah, this is how
you can control the order of execution
within a particular pipeline when you
have
situations wherein one step or one job
is dependent on other, and you want to
wait You want to make sure that this
particular job waits for the other one
to complete. I hope this has been
useful.
Let's start talking about context
objects and understand what they are. So
here I'm on the GitHub documentation,
and here I'll select on I'll select this
GitHub actions over here.
And here under reference, I'm going to
head over
to
to workflows and actions, and here I
have something called as context. You
can also search for context over here
directly in the search bar, but I'll
prefer navigating the manual way. Now
what are context objects? So see,
GitHub automatically provides built-in
context objects, and they give you some
sort of information
about the environment around. Now these
are not environment variables, but these
are special objects that you have access
to. For example, let's say you want some
information within your pipeline. So
within your pipeline, you want
information like who pushed the code.
Okay? What branch we are on? Okay? What
is the commit sha? Right? So whenever
you commit, you get a sha. So what is
that? And what is the repo name? So all
these sort of information you will have
access to using this context objects. So
you can see over here in this context
reference, okay? You can see uh find the
This gives you the information about uh
context available in GitHub action
workflow, okay? So these are all the
objects that are available. So GitHub is
one object, ENV is one object, vars is
one object, job is one another object.
If you want to see the details and the
usage, you can click over here.
You can see over here GitHub. And if you
open this in a new tab, you will see all
information. So this thing opens up.
Oops, so let me open it again.
So I'll just open this up and you can
see this is GitHub context. And this
context This context object contains the
information about the workflow run and
the event triggered the run.
Okay? So here is how you can use it. So
if you say uh github.action, it is going
to give you the name of the action that
is currently running. If you say
action.path, oh sorry,
github.action_path.
This is a path where the action is
located. So all this sort of information
you get over here. github.actor.
This is going to give you the user of
the the username of the user who
triggered the initial workflow workflow
run. Okay, so you you can get access to
all of this in the pipeline itself.
actor_id, API URL, all of this. And the
This is just one object with so many
properties. You can see over here. The
repository, github.repository. This is
going to give you the owner and the
repository name. For uh for example,
something like this. The the URL like
this. Okay? Uh it's This is giving you
the repository ID. This is giving you
the repository owner. A lot of stuff you
get over here. It's it's a huge uh huge
information over here. And if you scroll
at the top,
you might also see some information as
to how you can use it. So you can see
this is how you use it. Okay, we'll
we'll see all of this. But yeah,
different objects you can access like
ENV is one, ENV is another, okay? You
can see over here ENV and ENV. You can
access the environment variable name,
okay? And uh if you want to see the
usage, you can actually see it down over
here. I scrolled up, but here you can
see example of usage of GitHub context.
You can see this is how you are going to
get the output.
Okay, this is giving you us the output.
Okay, these are all the properties
that it's showing us.
Okay, and this is how you can use it.
Okay, here here is the usage. So, if the
event name is pull request, you can see
over here. If github.event_name
is pull request, then you execute this.
Right? So, if you want to have a
conditional execution on a particular
step, this is how you can do it. Right?
Can you see this?
Right? So, this is how it does. We have
env over here. There are tons of context
objects you can see over here. Okay? If
you scroll down, vars context. So, tons
of context objects. Okay, there is a
long list you can go through it. Okay?
But, I'll show you directly by example
as to how you can make use of it. So,
so, along with this video, I have this
file that is being attached. And, this
file actually makes use of, you know,
some of the context objects over here.
So, I'm going to copy this.
I'm going to come over here to the code.
And here, I'm going to create a
I'm just going to Can we duplicate this?
I don't see any sort of duplication over
here.
But, I'll just create a new YAML file.
I'll say context
uh demo
.yaml.
Okay?
And, I'll just paste this here.
Like so. Okay?
And, what I will do is the previous file
that we were working on, env secret
inputs, it is actually now running on
push. So, I'll just comment this, and
I'll just make sure it runs on workflow
dispatch, because I don't want it to run
automatically. Okay, I want to focus on
one file at a time. So, you can see over
here, this is one example over here.
Context demo object. And here, you can
see you're using this context demo
GitHub actor. So, whoever is the actor,
the username. So, my username will come
in is testing out GitHub actions. This
will be the run name over here. right?
And run name is the name of the workflow
that is generated. Right? Workflow runs
The name for the workflow runs that are
generated for
from the workflow, okay? And GitHub is
going to display this workflow run name
in the list of workflows, okay? So, this
is what we are going to see. I've I've
given it a custom run name.
Here, you're seeing like when it's
triggered, push.
Jobs, okay, this is explore GitHub
actions. And here you can see it runs on
Ubuntu latest. And you can see all the
jobs over here, okay? So, this job was
automatically triggered by and here we
are making use of event name.
Okay, this job is running on runner.os.
So, runner is a
uh runner is a object. You can see over
here.
Right? You're seeing it.
Name of the branch is github.ref, right?
So, it's giving you the name of the
reference of the reference branch name,
right? And your repository is it is
making use of this, okay? Then we are
having uh we are checking out the
repository code and then it's telling us
Okay, the owner has the name of the
repository over here.
You can see it has been cloned to the
runner.
And then here we are printing the
workspace and then here we are printing
the job status. Right? So, all these
This is just an example. What I would do
is I would uh quickly
commit uh and I'll say context demo
here.
Like so.
And I'll say get push.
Oops, so this file was not added
probably. So, I'll just get it added and
here now I'll say push.
Right? So, this is pushed and if you
come over here
if you go back
Okay.
And if you see, uh you will have a
workflow run.
Over here, context objects demo. You can
see and it's running actually. So, you
can see over here the run name is
Faisal.
Uh so, this is my username. This is
testing He's testing out GitHub actions,
right? So, this is a run name that I'm
seeing.
Now, if I go inside here
I'm going to see over here. You can see.
Okay, this was automatically triggered
by the push event. So, you can see this
push is coming in
from here.
You can see over here.
Push event. We're getting this from the
context object. This is now running on a
Linux server. This is also coming in
from the context object, right? Now,
this is also coming. Your branch is refs
heads and working. This is also coming
in from the context object. And you're
seeing the complete output over here.
The repository is
This is the repository. Official
repository, right?
embarkxofficial/fullstackai
devops masterclass.
Then, check out the checking out the
code over here. So, this is where the
actions came into play.
And then over here, you are seeing this
repository again. It has been cloned
to the runner.
And then you're see you're seeing the
workflow is now ready to test onto the
runner.
Uh we are listing the files over here,
you can see. And uh the job status is
success. You can see over here.
Right? Post check out of the repository
flow, so all this clean up is being
done. So, you can see over here how you
were able to get some data, real-time
data, into the context of how the run
happened. Right? Who is running it?
Everything. So, you can see over here.
If you want to have a predefined run
like this, uh with uh the actor name,
okay? You can make use of context
objects. Right? So, I hope this concept
is clear of concept objects, and I hope
the syntax is also clear. Right? And I
did not type in the entire file just to
save the time, okay? Because uh we've
already We already know these concepts.
And I wanted to focus a bit more on the
syntax and the concept of context object
over here.
I hope this has been useful, and I hope
uh you found this valuable.
All right. So, now it's time where we
are going to take a look at this app one
hello application, and we are going to
take a look at the Spring Boot version.
And what we are going to do is we are
going to build and test the application
using a pipeline and we are also going
to push after successful building and
testing to a Docker
Hub or Docker repository or Docker
registry, whatever you call it. Okay?
So, we are going to do that. So, it's
going to be completely in an automated
way wherein any sort of push if hap- if
it happens to the repository,
what you can do is you can get uh the uh
build tested, uh compiled, tested, then
you can uh create a jar and then you can
get it pushed to the Docker Hub. That is
what we are going to do over here. Okay?
And uh for this uh what we will do is
we'll also need a Docker Hub account. We
already have a Docker Hub account. This
is where we are going to push. This is
the exact repository where we are going
to push. And uh I'll come over here.
We'll start defining
the things. So, here what I will do is
I'll create a new file. I'll say hello.
Uh hello CI
or I'll say hello spring underscore
CI.yml.
Okay?
Something like this.
And uh here for all the other uh YAML
files, just make sure they are set to
workflow dispatch. All right? So, that I
don't want all the workflows to trigger
whenever you push any sort of code
there, right? What I will do is I'll
come over here in second.yml. I'll just
copy this template sorts
and I'll just paste it so that I can
save a bit on uh typing. And here I'm
going to say hello spring boot
uh
app. Okay? Hello spring boot app to
Docker. Something like this we can say.
Okay?
Now, instead of workflow dispatch, I'll
just comment this workflow dispatch and
I'll have a push over here.
Something like this.
Now, I have the job defined build over
here. So, I'll just rename this job to
build test because we'll be building the
application and we'll also be testing
the application over here within this
particular job. And we're making use of
Ubuntu latest over here. Okay? Then we
have steps over here. So, different
steps. So, what all steps we need over
here? Okay, so I'll I'll just define all
the steps. So, first step is I'll say
check out code.
Okay? Of course, before executing
anything, we will need access to the
source code. I'll just copy this here.
And then
Okay.
So, then after checking out the code,
I'll need Java on my machine. Okay? So,
see this runner that is being configured
over here,
that is a fresh machine. That is like a
fresh machine, right? It does not have
anything. So, we need to set up things
on it. Now, if you want to build jars,
if you want to test the application, we
need Java, right? So, here I'll say uh
set up
JDK. Okay?
And I'll just trim down this echo
statements over here. I don't want echo,
but I'm just keeping echo for now. We'll
update these things. Okay? Right now,
I'm just defining the steps all the
steps. Okay? Oops. So, here now I'll say
oops, something like this. Okay? So,
this is done. Now, after setting up the
JDK, what I'm going to do is I'm going
to build and test the application. So,
first I'm going to build and test. Okay?
So, we are going to run a command that
is going to test the application and we
are going to run run it using Maven.
Okay? Once this is done, I am going to
come here
and I am going to
say
I'll upload the test reports. Okay?
Upload test reports.
Something like this. Okay?
So, what am I doing? I'm first checking
out the code.
Okay? So, code check out is done. Why
are we doing this? Because we need code
first. Then I'll set up the JDK.
Then I'll build and test the application
using Maven. And then I'll upload the
test reports if they are generated or
whatever is generated. I'll do that.
Okay? And then we will have another job,
okay, which is going to do the job of
pushing
and like creating the Docker image and
then pushing it to the server. Okay? But
first let's have things with one job
only. Or what I can do is I can at least
define like both the jobs. Okay? So,
I'll copy this much.
I'll come over here.
Okay?
Press enter
from here.
I'll paste this. Okay?
So, this is done.
And here instead of build test, this
will be
I'll just get rid of this.
This will be Docker
build
push. Something like this. Okay? This is
also going to run on Ubuntu latest and
this will be dependent on the previous
steps. So, I'm going to say needs
build test. Something like this. Okay?
Because this is dependent on the
previous step.
Build test, right? So, this is done. And
then I've defined the steps over here.
Now, we need to modify all the steps.
Okay? So, first step is again check out
code because this is a fresh machine
that is getting provisioned for a new
job, right? So, I'm first going to do a
code checkout over here. Then I'm going
to set up JDK again. Okay? And then over
here instead of build and test, I'm
going to build a jar for Docker. A fresh
jar for Docker. That is what I'm going
to build.
Then
we need to publish this particular uh
uh image, right? So, what we need to do
is uh we need to log in to Docker Hub.
So, I'm going to say log in to Docker
Hub like so. And then let me copy these
steps. I'll copy.
Okay?
And here I'm going to paste this log in
to Docker Hub and then I'm going to say
over here build and push Docker image.
Build and push Docker image like so.
Okay, this is done and this will be the
last step. Okay, so what am I doing?
We have We have created two jobs.
[snorts]
First one is going to do the job of
building and testing the application.
Okay, first of all this entire workflow
runs on push.
Whenever there is any code pushed, this
entire workflow runs. Okay.
And we'll be first
like we have two jobs, one is build and
test and other is Docker build and push.
It builds the Docker image and pushes
it. In build test, we have like we we
first get the code, we set up the JDK.
This This is all housekeeping stuff.
Then we actually start building the
application and then we upload the test
reports. Okay. And then over here in
Docker build push, we again because it's
a new machine, first of all it's
dependent on the previous job which is
build test. That job has to finish
first. Then we are check we are doing a
checkout for the code and then we are
setting up the JDK. Then we are building
the jar and then we are logging in to
get Docker Hub. I'll show you how you
can do that and then we are building the
image and pushing it. Okay, so let's go
step by step now.
From the beginning.
First thing is check out the code. Okay,
so here we are not going to make use of
run. We are going to make use of a
GitHub action. I'm going to say uses and
I'm going to say actions {slash} check
out {at} the rate V4. Now this is a
ready-made GitHub action that you can
make use of actions {slash} check out.
Then I'm going to set up the JDK. So if
you come over here,
Okay, if you come over here,
I can go to GitHub actions like so.
Okay, here.
And okay, here and you can Okay, we
don't have
uh one second. So if you scroll down on
this page, you can explore the actions
marketplace over here.
Okay. So I'm going to make use of You
can see.
So it's Java, right? I want to set up
Java. So, you can see over here, set up
JDK.
Okay, so if you click on this, you can
see
uh
here.
How do you use this?
If you scroll down,
okay?
Here is how you can use it. You can see
it uses set up Java.
Okay?
And
uh you can uh mention the distribution
and the Java version.
And it is going to set up for you. Okay,
so I just want to copy the set up part,
which is this part. Okay, from the uses.
Okay?
I don't want to check out part over
here, so I'm just going to come over
here and I'm going to replace this.
Okay?
Oops, so this needs to be indented well,
like so.
Okay?
All right, so it will be like so.
Oops.
It will be like so.
Okay, this is done with distribution.
What is the problem now over here?
Okay, I understood. So, this cannot be
like this.
I did some indentation mistakes. All
right, so this is done. This is sorted
now. Okay, some syntax issues, but it's
all sorted. So, what we are doing is we
are saying actions
{slash} set up Java V5.
Then I'm mentioning the distribution
over here, which is Temurin. You can see
the supported distributions for
available options. Okay, so if you
search for Java Temurin, you'll get the
available options. So, I can search over
here Temurin
Java or Temurin Java, something like
this. And you can see all the latest
releases of Temurin.
All of that you can check. If you want
some other release, you can see
uh in which distribution it is provided,
but I'm making use of Temurin. I'm fine
with 21.
Okay, I hope the application
uh will run with 21. So, let me check
that as well. Okay, so here if you go to
pom.xml, okay, it will work on 21. Okay,
this is important. You should know how
your application works, right? So, 21.
If you're making use of any sort of
latest Java version, you can mention
that and get that distribution. So, this
should be done, okay? Java.
Now, what we need to do is we need to
build and test, okay? So, for here for
that I'm going to come here and I'm
going to specify the working directory.
Right? Why am I specifying the working
directory? I'll get to that shortly, but
I'll also mention the command over here.
So, command I want to run is mvn -b
and I'll say clean verify. Okay? Now,
where should this command be run?
Where should you run this command?
This command should run in hello-spring
folder.
It should not run anywhere on this
runner.
Right? The runner that is getting
provisioned open to latest, it should
not get run anywhere.
So, what I need to do is I need to
specify the working directory as to
where this command will be executed. So,
I'm going to say docker.
Okay? So, where where is our actual code
base? It's in docker app-one-hello.
Then, I've spring-boot and then
hello-spring. Okay? If you want, you can
get it using the command line as well.
So, you can say clear over here and you
can get the present working directory.
You have to Oops. So, not here.
But, you can navigate to docker
and then you can say app-one-
hello and then you can say spring-boot
and then you can say hello-spring.
Like so.
Okay? Now, you have the
complete directory over here, okay? I'll
just copy this.
And Oops. So,
I'll copy this and I'll paste it over
here. Like so.
Now, we cannot use backward slash. I'll
make use I'll have to make use of
forward slash.
Okay?
So, like so.
Like so.
And done. Okay? So, this is done.
So, in the current directory, what it's
saying is in the current directory, just
navigate to docker
app-one-hello-spring-boot
and hello-spring. And in the current
directory, you will have docker because
you have checked out the code. You've
checked out the code, right?
In the previous step. So, you will have
this directory. Now, what you are doing
is you are running this command in this
directory over here, which is good.
Now, we need to upload the test reports.
So, what I will do is I will come over
here. Okay.
I've navigated to github.com/actions.
And here, I'm going to search for
upload. Okay. Upload hyphen artifact.
Like so. Okay.
Now, here, so you can find actions from
here as well or you can find actions
from here as well, from the marketplace
link. That is completely okay. All
right. Now, here, uh you can make use of
this action. So, if you scroll down over
here, usage. So, here under usage is
what you'll find the information for.
So, name and path is what you need.
You'll copy.
Okay.
And uh you'll paste it like so. Okay.
Indentation issues again. So, I'll get
this indented well.
Like so.
This is done.
Okay.
And uh yeah, I'll get rid of this these
comments. Okay. I don't need these.
You can either type in or you can do
using copy paste. It's completely your
choice.
But yeah, this is done. Okay. Action
{slash} upload artifact version four.
And you need to mention the name of the
artifact, so it will be test reports.
And I from here,
I'm also going to mention the uh path
that needs to get uploaded.
So, the path, see, there is a default
path where these test reports will be
generated by default. You can mention
under hello spring within application,
there will be target folder {slash} sure
fire reports.
Okay. So, this is what you need to
mention.
Now, why Surefire reports is the folder
that we are picking in? Because this is
where Maven JUnit store the test results
by default. Okay? So, this is what we
are referring to. So, this one job is
complete.
Okay? One job is complete. What I will
do is I'll save this.
Okay? I'll save this. I'll come over
here.
I'll say clear.
And, uh, I'll say commit.
Let's commit and let us see hello.
Spring
uh, CI.
Right? Hello Spring CI is the message.
Oops. So, this did not get added. That's
the problem.
I'll just get this added.
Okay.
What's the problem?
Okay, this is not again added. So, 1
second.
Okay.
So, get add.
Get status.
Okay, this is not added yet.
Let me try again. So, I've exited, uh,
the terminal. I'm saying get add.
Okay, and then
Let's say get status. Okay, so it's been
added now. And now I'll do a commit. And
now we can do a
push like so.
Now, the moment we do a push, you would
see a workflow run over here.
Right?
So, let us see the workflow run. Okay.
So, let me refresh.
Okay, you can see Hello Spring CI. This
is the workflow run and it's running
right now. It's building the
application.
Okay, it's downloading the JDK. You can
see over here. The entire stack trace,
it's downloading the JDK onto the
runner.
Right?
And, uh,
Okay, so it's building the application.
Let's wait for a bit.
Okay, the JDK download is happening.
Okay, once the JDK is configured, it is
going to upload the test results. So,
you can see uploading and then
post it up JDK, post checkout code, and
then the job was completed, which is
fair enough. Okay? Docker build push
does not have anything, so what I'm
going to do is I'm going to collapse
everything, right? And let us see uh
what happened. So, were were the
test reports uploaded? Yes, the test
reports were uploaded as well. Okay, let
us see what were uploaded exactly. So,
if I come over here,
okay?
And if I go over here, let me see. If
you scroll down,
here you're going to see the artifact,
and this is the test report. So, you can
just click on it and get it downloaded.
So, I've downloaded the zip file. I got
the zip file, and you can see these are
the test reports that I got. Okay? This
is all This is how you get the test
reports. Okay? I'm not going to open
these, but that's okay. Uh this is how
you will get the test reports generally.
If you want, you can open like this,
okay? You will see all the reports here.
Okay, but I'm not opening this. I'll
just close this. But, this is how you
can upload the test reports. I hope you
get the context over here. Now, what are
we going to do here is this is done this
much. We come over here. This This part
is done. Like building and uh you know,
verifying the application and generating
tests is done. Now, what we need to do
is we need to uh like build the Docker
image and push it to the remote Docker
hub. And as you can see, a few steps
there is an overlap for few steps. So,
I'll just
copy this much until build and test or
or I don't need to copy until build and
test Maven. I'll just copy the first two
steps,
and I'll just paste it like this over
here, okay? So, here also we are like
checking out the code because it's a
fresh new machine, and we are uh setting
up the Java over here. So, Java setup is
done.
Now, we need to build the jar for
Docker, okay? And for that, we need to
run the command. So, command running
already we have done like so. So, this
is what I'm going to copy, command
running.
And here I'm going to paste this like
so. So, working directory is this,
right? And I'm going to say MVN FNB
clean, and instead of verify, I'm going
to say package
D skip test. So, I don't want to run any
sort of tests when packaging the
application. Now, the output of this is
it is going to give me a JAR file, dot
JAR file. And before making use of dot
JAR file, I'm going to log in to Docker
Hub. Okay? So, to log in to Docker Hub,
I'm going to come back.
Okay.
And here you I can search for
Docker Hub like so.
Okay.
And uh here Docker login.
Okay, Docker login is here. And how is
it used?
If you can see, okay, build, tag, push.
Okay, this is not the one I'm referring
to.
So,
one second. So, here by all creators, I
need by verified. Okay.
So, Docker.
If I just search for Docker,
okay, so this is verified now by
verified creators.
Okay, one second. So, let me select by
verified creators. Okay, this is there.
And there is a GitHub action for Docker
Hub. Now, if I click on this,
okay, you can see
this is what it is, and this is
verified. GitHub is man- GitHub is
manually verified the creator.
Okay? If you scroll down over here,
you're going to see this, right? This is
how you use it. See, there are going to
be many actions that you will see over
here in the marketplace from different
creators. You have to make sure you're
picking the right ones. Right? So, these
are all verified, and you can see this
blue tick.
Verified as in some organization might
have published this, and here uh in case
of this, I'm not able to see the
organization name over here, but yeah,
it's by Docker officially. You can see
over here, it's by Docker officially on
the right hand side.
So, it's official, right? It's an
official uh action that you're using.
So, it's good. So, I'll come over here.
I'll copy this step step over here.
Okay, this much.
Let's copy this much and let us come
over here.
And we're going to log in to Docker Hub.
So, I'll just paste this like this.
And I'll press tab.
Okay.
Tab and tab.
Like so.
Okay, this is done. I'm saying login
actions and here
Docker Hub username. Okay, I won't say
vars, I'll say secrets.
Docker Hub username and Docker Hub
token. Or you can make use of Docker
password. Okay, so you can say
uh Docker password or Docker token,
whatever it is. So, I'll just say Docker
password.
Okay. And this is
See, these are secret names. So,
whatever you're defining over here, you
have to make sure you define that in the
UI. Right? So, you have to mention that.
And username password you have added.
And now what you need to do is you have
to build and push the image.
Now, for this particular step wherein we
need to build and push Docker image, I'm
going to come over here and I'm going to
say build
Docker.
And we'll see this build and push Docker
images action. This is official one. And
if you scroll down, you would see the
usage as well.
Okay, build and push.
So, we already have a Docker file in our
application. So, what I'm going to do is
I'm going to make use of this last one.
Okay, I'll copy this.
We'll come over here.
And I'll simply
paste this over here. Like so. Okay.
I don't need name, so I'll just get rid
of name.
And I'll just indent everything. Okay.
This is like how it is. Okay, yeah.
So, you can see over here. Okay, this is
how build and push Docker image is
working. It is making use of this
action, which we just saw.
And I have width over here. Okay. Now,
there are a lot of parameters that you
can set over here. We need to set this
context.
Right? Why are we setting the context?
Uh to build a Docker image, right? So,
we need set that and there are a few
parameters that
uh you should have access to here as
well. So, you can see over here.
Context is one, okay, build context.
You can see context.
This is context, right?
So, all of these uh parameters we'll use
uh it's there already on the page as
well. So, here what I will do is I'll
come over here. I'll say context like
so. So, we'll specify the context. What
is the context? So, this
same thing same path is the context
because this is where our Docker file
resides, okay? I'm going to say push is
true. Tags, okay, we can mention tags
over here. So, I am going to say
something like this here.
And on the next line I'm going to add
multiple tags over here, okay? So, first
thing is we can mention secrets. dot
Docker username. So, I'll copy this
much, okay? So, let's say I want to tag
this. So, I'm going to make use of the
username that we have access to. And I'm
going to say slash hello.
And uh what is the name of the repo? So,
I have the name of the repo over here.
Uh the name of the repo is hello spring.
So, I'm going to copy hello spring.
Come over here.
And just mention hello spring like so.
And you can say latest, okay?
Now, you can add multiple tags to this.
So, this is one.
Uh I I can stick to one or I can add
multiple tags if you wish to. So, I can
say spring and uh here I can also add
the sha. So, I can say GitHub.
dot sha.
Okay, something like this. And then I'll
duplicate this again.
And I can say
one more tag over here can be ref name.
ref underscore name. So, you can add as
many tags as you want and you will see
all this reflecting on Docker Hub, okay?
This is done and I'll just save this
file and let us now try uh you know,
pushing the code and let us see this in
action. So, I'll just come over here.
I'll clear. I'll say get add and I'll
say get commit. So, let us do a commit
quickly
and then do a push.
Like so.
So, the moment you push this, let us
come here
and I'll see the CI over here. Let us go
back.
Okay, you can see the workflow run is
there. It's It's in process. Build push
uh like build test is happening.
Okay, 3 seconds down. Now, build Docker
build push has not started. Why it does
not started? Because we are making use
of needs keyword. Okay?
So, here oops, here if you see
we are making use of this needs keyword,
right? So, that is why it's dependent on
build test. It's It's not started until
build test completes, right? And you can
actually get the use case of this
particular keyword. So, you can see
build test finished and now it has
started Docker build push. Right? And if
you click on this, you're going to see
everything. So, jar building is
happening. You can see.
Okay?
Uh jar building oops, so jar building if
you go down
there's a lot of processing. Okay?
Uh by the time I scroll, okay, there's a
lot of processing here. Okay? So, here
you can see no post checkout code and
everything was done. Okay, so it was
done.
Oops, so login to Docker Hub failed. Why
did it fail?
Okay, I know the reason. Simple reason
we did not add we did not set up these
uh ENV variables, right? So, that was
incorrect. I have almost forgot about
it. So, I'll come over here.
I'll uh I'll go to
go to like I'll I'll go back. Okay? I'll
go to home
and then I'll go to settings over here.
We will scroll down. I'll go to secrets
and variables actions
and I'll add two repository secrets over
here. One secret is the Docker username.
Now, whatever is my username, I'll add
that. So, decode007.
This is what I've added. I'll add the
secret. Okay? Just make sure the name of
the variable that you are adding and
what whatever you are adding in the UI,
they both have to match. Otherwise, it's
not going to find it. I'll enter my
password over here. And now you can see
the secret has been added, username and
password, right? So, this should now
function. So, what I will do is I will
come over here again in actions. Can we
do a manual trigger? I think we cannot.
Right?
We cannot. View the workflow file,
delete. Okay, I cannot trigger it
manually. So, what I will have to do is
I'll press enter
one time
over here.
And I'll do a commit. Okay, so I'll
commit and I'll push.
Okay, let us see this in action. So,
this should now work uh in my opinion
because we have added the two uh ENV
variables. I think this was uh what we
needed, right? No other variables,
Docker username and Docker password.
That's fine.
So, I think this should now be working.
Let us Let me refresh. You can see this
is working.
And now I So, you can see build test is
running, 12 seconds down. I'll just be
on uh Docker build push. Okay, so this
should start. So, we'll wait for a
while, a few seconds, but you can see it
is already in progress. And uh right now
building and testing is happening.
25 seconds, 26 seconds.
27. It seems like it's done.
Now, let's go to Docker build push. This
is the next job. The machine is getting
provisioned, in my opinion. So, I'm not
able to click. Okay.
Yeah, now it started. So, you can see
building JAR for Docker.
Okay, it's building the JAR file. Let us
wait for a while.
It should log in successfully now to
Docker Hub, if provided your username
and passwords are correct, by the way.
Okay. It should be correct.
And it's trying to log in. Okay, login
was succeeded and it is building the
Docker image now. Okay, build failed.
And now it's doing the post check out.
So, why did the build fail? Let us see.
Our build has failed with error invalid
tag. All right, invalid tag. Okay.
So, we are trying to make use of what
over here. It's It's not able to access
it.
Okay. Okay, I get this. Username,
username, username.
And invalid tag. Okay.
Okay, I understood the problem over
here. Very silly mistake we have done.
Okay, this is not a valid tag. Why it's
not a valid tag? Because we missed the
dollar sign. Oh.
How can I miss something so simple?
Okay, I've added a dollar sign over
here. You can see now. And now let us do
a commit. It should work for sure now.
So, I hope you got the issue over here.
We were trying to tag Okay, we were
trying to tag the image over here, but
this expression This expression that we
had mentioned was not getting evaluated
to something meaningful, and that is why
it failed. All right. So, what I will do
is if you see the Docker Hub as well,
let me refresh. There was a push around
30 days ago. So, you can see.
Last push was quite some time back. Let
me refresh. Okay, it's still 30 days
ago. So, there is no push yet. Let me go
to summary.
Okay, and let me go back.
And let me see how the run is happening
now. Okay, build test is we are 29 30
seconds down the line. And right now
build test is done, and Docker build
push has started. So, let us see how
this is working now.
It's building the jar for Docker.
It should now successfully log in to
Docker Hub, right? It In my opinion.
Uh I I should not face any issues
because login succeeded last time as
well.
Okay, let's see. So, login succeeded,
and image is building. You can see over
here. Okay, it's happening.
And
uh it's pushing. Okay, it's pushing the
image. You can see over here. Right? You
can see the logs. It's pushing the
image, and uh
You You see everything is done, right?
And post build up is also done. There
were There are no failures now.
Right? Can you see this?
It's completely successful. It's
completely successful, and this is
absolutely brilliant. So, we are now
able to build our application and push
it to Docker
automatically,
okay, using a CI pipeline. So, if you
come over here, you can see last push
was 30 days ago.
There is only one tag, and this is the
latest, like 1.0 and latest, okay?
Latest was pushed around 1 month back.
So, I'll just refresh this, and we
should see a latest push. You can see
last push was 1 minute ago.
This is the working uh tag. This is
These are all tags that we have added.
This is the image, uh you know, commit
hash, you know? So, if you come over
here,
so, if you go to the repository, if you
see the commits,
okay? Uh you're going to see this hash,
BF1EF66.
So, that is what it's tagged with,
BF1EF66,
and the complete commit hash. That is
what it's tagged with. If you don't want
to have this, that's completely okay.
I've just shown you ways of doing
things, you know?
Uh latest is pushed, latest is tagged.
Uh working was also tagged. Why working
was tagged?
So, see over here. There are three
images that were pushed. One is the
latest.
Another one is the uh like the commit
ID, okay? This is commit SHA.
Okay? And then you had the branch name
over here, branch name. This is the
branch name.
So, three things were triggered, okay?
If you want, you can commit comment this
and just have
uh the push done to
just have the push done to what we call
uh the main branch, all right? Or or
using latest, right? So, I'll I can just
comment this. Why is it not commenting?
This is commented. This is commented,
okay? Now, if you scroll up, okay? Uh
now, there is one problem.
I'll tell you the problem also. It says,
if there is any sort of push event
occurring on this entire repository,
trigger this.
Right? Now,
tell me if someone makes changes, let's
say to readme file, should the entire
pipeline run?
Should it run?
No, it should not, right? Why would you
waste resources? You would run
everything. You would upload a new test
artifact. This way, like, you know, on
every small change, even if someone
makes any change to this Kubernetes
configuration, this pipeline is going to
run, right? When do you want this
pipeline to run? This is for hello
or world applic- like hello application
for Spring. So, if there are any changes
happening in this folder, only then you
should run this
pipeline, right? If there are any fold
changes happening in this folder.
So, what I'm going to do is I'm going to
say on push, and I'm going to have a
colon over here, and I'm going to
mention some configuration. I'm going to
say paths, and I'm going to mention the
path over here.
So, this path is the
change path. So, if any sort of happen
in this particular path,
only then you run this. Okay? Now, this
is for run, and this for workflow
dispatch, okay, over here.
Workflow
dispatch. So, I can also
trigger this,
uh you know, manually. Okay? So,
workflow dispatch, push,
and only on this paths. So, if there is
any sort of changes that is happening on
this path, only then you trigger this
pipeline. Right? So, let me run this
now. Oh, sorry, let me commit this.
Commit, and get this pushed, and now,
let us come over here.
I'll go back.
Okay.
Okay, you can see. All right, so you can
see this workflow has this, so you can
now run this manually.
Right? So, that is absolutely okay, and
you can see this workflow was not
triggered now. Can you see this?
Was it triggered? No. Why it was not
triggered?
Because you added this configuration,
right?
If push happens or if there are any
changes in this path, only then you
trigger this workflow, right? Did you
make any changes in this path? No, you
actually made changes in this pipeline,
right? Which is outside this path. So,
there was nothing that was triggered
over here.
Now, if you want to trigger, you can we
have added a workflow dispatch. This is
the only reason why we have added
workflow dispatch because we are not
going to make any changes to the code,
right? And I wanted to demonstrate this,
right? Now, if you don't make any
changes to the code and you want to
trigger pipeline, you should have a
workflow dispatch. So, that is why I've
added this and I can now run this.
Okay. Now, the moment I run this,
okay.
Where is the run happening? Let me see.
All workflows.
It's running now. And now you're going
to see
like working and this hash won't be like
added, but there will only be push that
will happen to latest over here, okay?
So, we'll wait for a while. It's 12
seconds, 13 seconds, 14 seconds, but I
hope you get the gist of why we added
this,
you know?
Why we added this path and how we also
saw it in action. You made changes to
the CI file,
okay? And because CI is outside this
path, uh after committing, this was not
triggered, right? So, we we won't want
all the workflows to run uh when there
is a small change in the application,
right? We won't want that to happen.
You can even configure this to make sure
that this runs on a certain branches
only, branches. You can see, hyphen
main. So, you can mention the branch
name. So, on main branch, if any changes
happen on this path, only then this
workflow will trigger, okay? I'm just
commenting out. I don't want to add
branches, but you can see the level of
customizations that you are getting over
here, okay? You can see Docker build
test and build test is happening and
Docker push is also happening. But you
can see the level of customizations that
you are getting uh in this CI uh
in this pipeline over here, okay? So,
you can see okay, docker build push is
failed and I can probably I probably
know the reason over here, okay?
So, I this thing is not commented yet.
The thing is this is not commented yet,
the last part.
Okay.
This is not commented yet, so what I
will do is I'll just leave it this way
for a while or what I can do is I can
just convert this into
something like this, okay?
So, the thing over here is this is not
being considered as a comment because
I've used pipe. So, instead of that,
I'll make use of normal list over here.
So, I think this that should
work well, okay? So, now this is a
normal list.
Okay.
Uh, normal one.
Oops.
Okay, it's not allowing list as well.
So, I'll just do a control Z and we'll
stick to where we were originally.
Oops, so this I'll make sure it's
commented and if you scroll down,
this I'll make sure it's commented. If
you scroll down, I'll just get rid of
these and I'll just make sure this
exist. Okay.
And uh, let me save this and let me
comment and push.
So, you cannot add comment over here
because this is after pipe, okay? And
it's it's considering it as a part of
string. So, you either either delete it,
right? I don't want to delete because I
want to have this as an example uh, on
the repo for you all. So, I'm not
deleting this, but now what I can do is
I can just run this for the final time
and uh, I'll show you it's working,
okay? So, if I run the workflow, you're
going to see it running and we're going
to see this for the last time now. Uh,
and this is like a test run that I'm
doing, okay? We already saw it running,
but after making all the changes, I want
to make sure it's running fine, okay?
So, you can see now build test is
happening.
All right, so I've waited for a while,
almost a minute or more than a minute I
would say. Uh
and I could see like this first step,
first job took 39 seconds and this one
took 40 seconds, okay? But both are
successful and now you can see the
latest
uh images also. So, last push was 2
minutes ago. If I refresh this,
it would be like less than a minute ago,
right? So, this is working fine and I
hope you all have been able to follow
along this
and uh I hope this has been super useful
for you all.
Hey there. So, now it's time we take a
look at our Node.js application. And if
you come over here in the Docker folder,
app one, hello, and uh just head over to
node over here. So, here you are going
to see this is our Node.js application.
We already have a Dockerfile that we
have already written.
We have uh the app here in app.js
and everything is here
in this particular folder, okay? So,
what we need to do is we need to
containerize this application. So, first
of all, we are going to build this
particular application, build and test
the application. That is going to be
step one and then we are going to build
the Docker image and push it to Docker
Hub or whatever registry you are using,
right? So, here we are going to do this
with the help of uh a pipeline that we
establish. We wish to achieve this in an
automated way and here on Docker Hub, we
already have this hello node. So, here
is where I want to do some push. So, if
there is any sort of code changes that
happens in the repository or in the uh
application for uh node, okay? I I would
want to build it automatically, get it
tested, and also create an image and
push it to the remote Docker registry.
That is what I want to do. What I'm
going to do is I'm going to come over
here
and uh here under GitHub workflows, I
am going to add a new file and this is
going to be hello
uh I'm going to have node
and then I'm going to have CI.yml,
okay? Something like this. So, this is
my YAML file that I have created. And
here I have uh this
template for the pipelines. I'm going to
copy that and I'm going to paste it over
here, right? Now, we'll start making
modifications over here so that we adapt
uh to our requirements, right? So, the
first thing that I'm going to do is I'm
going to make sure it works. It runs on
push, okay? Uh this thing runs on push
and uh also I'll I'll just have a
workflow dispatch as well.
Uh that's completely okay. I should be
able to run it manually as well. Uh and
uh so, this is there. I would like to
add some sort of configuration over
here.
Now, see
uh one thing is this with this
configuration this pipeline will run
whenever there is any changes to the
repository. But, what you can do is you
can add one more path parameter over
here and you can add the path over here.
Uh and whatever path you're adding over
here, that path will be tracked and
whenever there is any changes in that
particular path this pipeline will run.
So, this pipeline only runs if there is
a push at the path that you mentioned,
okay? So, we can mention that setting.
We can add that setting, but I'm not
adding that right now. I'll just comment
this out. Okay, we'll add that uh in the
end. But, right now this is done and we
need to define the jobs over here. So,
there are there are going to be two
jobs. One is building and testing the
application. Okay? Uh so, this first job
is build test. Uh I'm calling it build
test. You can call it whatever you want
to.
And uh it runs on Ubuntu uh latest,
okay? I have steps defined. Now, let us
take a look at the steps as well, okay?
So, this is number one, okay? This is
number one over here.
And uh this build test I would have the
other job, which is Docker
build, push, like so. Okay?
And this is also going to have some sort
of steps over here. We'll come to that.
But there are two jobs that we are
defining over here. One is building and
testing of application, and the other
job is to create a Docker image, build
it, and push it. Okay? These are two
jobs that we have defined. Both the jobs
will run independently. So, first, let's
complete the first job over here. So,
first is first step we will do is we
will check out the code. So, I'll say
check out code over here, something like
this. Okay? I'm not modifying the run
statement over here. I'm just leaving it
as is. I can just get rid of this. Okay?
The statement over here. I'm just
leaving the run over here. Okay? We can
come back and modify it later on. Okay?
But I'll go back to the new line.
I'll paste this.
So, this step one, we check out the
code. After checking out the code, you
know, the runner machine is empty,
right? The runner machine that gets
provisioned is of Ubuntu.
Right? It It is going to be empty
machine, a fresh machine that has
nothing on it. And we want to build our
application. So, what is the first thing
that you would need on that particular
machine? First thing you would need is
the ability to, you know, run Node.js
commands. And for that, you're going to
need Node.js. So, set up Node.js is our
second step.
Then we go down over here. The next step
is, of course, to install all the
dependencies. So, here I'm going to add
the step, and here I'm going to say
here I'm going to say install
dependencies
over here. Okay?
This is going to be the next step, and
then after this, I'm going to have
here
I'm going to have the next step as run
tests. Okay? So, I'm going going run
tests, and I'm going to run this
conditionally. So, if there are any
tests defined in the application, only
then it will run. If there are no tests,
then it won't run. So, I'll I'll have
the commands defined conditionally,
okay?
So, the first job does the job does the
work of building and testing the
application. First, we check out the
code. We set up Node.js. Then, we
install the dependencies, and then we
run any tests that exist, okay? Then,
the next job is of building and pushing
the Docker image. Now, over here also we
are going to need the steps and all,
okay? But first, we need to mention the
runner machine over here, like so.
Okay?
And here we have mentioned the runner
machine. I'll also say
needs over here, and this is going to
need this previous step build test over
here.
And then,
I'll I'll copy all of these steps, okay?
Let's copy all of these steps. We'll
modify them as we go, okay? You know,
just copying things, it saves a bit of
time, you know, from the from typing in
the syntax, right? So, first step would
be to check out the code, right? Second
step would be to log in to Docker Hub.
Right? So, we'll log in to Docker Hub.
Third step will be to build and push the
image, okay? Build and push the
image,
okay? Uh build and push Docker image,
I'll say.
Like so, okay? We don't need the last
step over here, so I'll just get rid of
this, okay? Now, here we did not uh we
do not need to install a Node.js on this
particular runner machine that gets
provisioned. Okay? So, I've not set up
Node.js here. So, just to reiterate,
this is a new job, Docker build push.
So, a new machine gets provisioned, new
runner machine gets provisioned over
here to complete this particular job,
and this job is dependent on the
previous job, that is what I've
mentioned, because only after
uh like
running the test, installing all the
dependencies, like running the test,
building the application, only after
that
you would go for building the Docker
image and pushing it, right? But you
need you still need code for the same.
So, I'm checking out the code, logging
into Docker Hub, and I'm building and
pushing the Docker image, okay? So, this
is how the entire flow is going to look
like. Of course, we have not defined the
actual commands that we are going to
run, okay? We will do that shortly, but
it's important to understand the flow
first. So, this is how pipelines are
also planned. See, whenever you're
working on a production grade
application, generally you would have a
outline of the steps that you need to
do.
First, you would check out the code,
then you would log into Docker Hub, then
you would, you know, if it's a Spring
Boot application, you'll have to create
a JAR file, right? But here, it's it's
not a Java project. It's Node.js, so you
will basically directly build build and
push the Docker image. So, all of these
things, you know, you need to plan out
first, like I've planned. You can plan
it out on a piece of paper. You just
write down or in your notes, write down
the steps and then convert it into code.
That way, you will make very less
mistakes, okay? Now, let us start
defining things, okay? So, for checkout
code, what I will do is I'll head over
to the actions page. So, come over here
to github.com/actions
and search for I would search for
checkout.
Like so, okay? So, you would see
checkout over here. This is an action
for checking out a repo. And if you
scroll down over here, okay? You can see
how this is used. Right? So, I'm going
to like copy this and then come over
here and then you can add it over here,
like so, okay? So, first thing, we are
going to check out the code, right? So,
checkout code is done. Then we need to
set up Node.js. So, of course, you would
need an action for the same. So, here
you can come and you can see Node.
Okay, so if you
come over here, this is probably the one
set up Node. So, this if you can see
over here, set up your GitHub Actions
workflow with a specific version of Node
JS. And this
constantly updated, so you can just open
this. Okay, set up Node and just come
over here.
And here you can see the actions file.
Or you can see Oh, sorry. You can see
the usage over here. So, just copy this.
Now, how you can use what all parameters
this action need, all of this is
demonstrated like depicted over here
along with the comments, right? So,
which version you want, you can mention
your version and all. So, we'll just
mention the version. I'll just copy
this. And then I'll paste paste it over
here.
Okay, and then I'll
I'll have to indent this. So, I'll do it
like this.
I'll get rid of the comments. I don't
need comments. Now, we need to mention
Node JS version over here. So, whenever
you are watching the video, whichever
Node JS version is available, you can
mention that. So, I'll just mention 25.
Okay,
you can mention whichever Node JS
version is available. Now, what this is
going to do is this is going to set up
Node JS onto this particular runner
machine. And this is a parameter that
you're passing to this particular
action. Right? Other parameters are
optional, so I'll just skip them. Then
we have install installing the
dependency. Now, installing the
dependency, what I'm going to do is I'm
going to run a command over here. So,
I'm going to get rid of this. I'm going
to say NPMCI over here. Right? So, this
is the command to run the dependencies.
And here, this command needs to be
executed in a working directory, right?
On a specific directory. So, I'm going
to say working directory, and I'm going
to say
the working directory is going to be
docker {slash} app one {slash} hello
{slash}
node.
So, in this particular directory, I wish
to run this particular command.
Now, here you must be wondering why are
we using npm CI and not npm install. So,
we use npm CI in CI pipelines
because you know, CI pipelines must
always produce the same result every
time and npm CI will install
dependencies exactly as locked in
package-lock.json.
So, in this package-lock.json that you
have over here
node and you'll have package-lock.json.
So, the locked dependencies will be
installed as it is making builds faster,
predictable, and repeatable. Okay? And
this is also this is better basically
for you know, pipelines. So, that is
what we are doing over here and then we
need to run test if any. Okay? So, this
command actually will run in this
working directory and then we also need
to set the working directory over here
for running the tests. Okay? Like so and
then we are going to run it over here.
So, I'm going to say npm
test and I'm going to say if present
flag. Okay? So, npm test if present. So,
if there are any test cases present, I I
think my project does not have our
project does not have any sort of test
cases. But, if you write any, if they
are present, only then it will be
executed. Otherwise, it will be skipped.
Okay? So, this is the first job that we
have finished writing. Okay? Now, let's
head over to the next job. Okay? So,
here
we have mentioned the runner, we have
mentioned the dependencies. In step, we
need to check out the code. So, of
course, checking out the code is going
to be same as this one. Here, I've
copied this
and I've mentioned check out code over
here. Okay? So, this is done. Now, I'll
have to log in to
Docker Hub. Okay? So, I need to log in
to Docker Hub. So, I'll come over here.
I need an action for that. So, I will
come over here and I'll say log in
Docker. Okay?
And okay, it's not coming in. So, log in
action. Let me check. So, there is an
action for this.
Okay.
So, it's not coming in. Let me search
for Docker. Maybe it'll come in now.
Okay, it's not showing up over here. I
don't know the reason for this.
Docker, let me go to the marketplace
actually. So, here on
github.com/marketplace,
I've come to uh marketplace and here
also I can search for action. So, here
let me search for or let me select
actions first. All actions.
Okay. And uh I've I've selected all
actions and now I'll mention Docker over
here. So, let us see what are the
results we get for Docker. Okay, so here
we are seeing some Docker related
actions. I don't know why they are not
coming over here, but if all the actions
are not coming over here, maybe you
should use uh the marketplace search,
okay? So, come over here, Docker login.
Just tap on Docker login. And uh here
you're going to see this action. And uh
here if you scroll down, you will see
the usage code as well, right? So, you
can see name is log into Docker Hub. And
it is also giving using and with
thing over here. So, just copy this
entire thing. Come over here.
And here just paste this, okay? Use
this.
And with. So, something like this, okay?
And uh you have to okay, like this. So,
now it's sorted. Uh name is log into
Docker Hub. It uses this action, login
action. And we are passing in the Docker
Hub username and uh Docker Hub token,
okay? Now, what I will do is I'm passing
both from one from vars and one from
secret. I'll make sure both are coming
in from secrets, okay? That is what I'll
do. And both of this both of this you
need to add uh in uh on your Docker UI,
okay? On the UI.
Now, I'm renaming both. I'll rename this
to Docker {underscore} username and
Docker {underscore} password, okay?
Password like so, okay? So, I I want to
have this as a variable name. You can
modify this, okay? You You just got the
syntax from here.
Right? This thing just give you the
syntax. If you want to have a different
variable name, you can, of course, do
that. Right? So, I've done that. Docker
username, Docker password. So, this is
done, okay? Login for login into Docker
will be done. And now we need to push
the uh Docker image as well. So, I'll
come over here.
And here, when you search, you also have
build and push the image. So, just open
this. Let us see what this action looks
like, okay? So, here, if you see, okay?
So, here it is setting up. It is setting
up build X. We don't need this. We need
to make use of this last thing over
here. Build and push.
Uh you can see build and push action at
the rate version six. I'm going to take
this, and I'm going to paste it over
here, like so.
Okay? And uh this has name as well. So,
I don't need name. I'll just get rid of
name over here.
Okay?
And uh then I will
use it like this, okay? Now, we need to
modify this a bit, okay? So, here, what
it is doing is it is making use of this
action. There are few parameters that
you can uh mention over here.
So, first parameter is, if you scroll
down, okay? You can mention context over
here. You can see?
So, I want to men- mention context
because we already have a Dockerfile
defined. So, you can see we have a
Dockerfile in this particular folder.
So, what you can see what you can do is
you can come over here. You can say
context, and uh you can mention
uh this
location over here. Right? So, I've
mentioned this,
like so.
Okay? Push. I'm saying I'm setting the
push to that of true. Tags, you can add
your own tags, whatever tags you want to
add, okay? So, here, now I will add I'll
add a pipe over here.
And uh here, I'm going to see
uh something like this, okay? And here
I'm going to see secrets. Oops. So, 1
second. So, I'll just take Docker
username over here, like so.
Right? So, Docker username.
And I'll say {slash} hello
node. So, what is the repo name I have?
Whatever my repo name is. So, my
username {slash} hello-node.
So, I'm going to add that hello-node.
I'm going to say colon and I'm going to
say latest, like so.
Okay? This is what I'm going to do and
this is what I'll push it as.
So, I think this is it. We don't need
anything else. Context is set.
Everything is set. And, uh let's see how
this functions, okay?
I'll go to
Okay, I'll go to
terminal and I'll make sure
I'm in the right directory. Okay, I'm in
the node directory itself. So, I'll say
get status here.
Okay, if you want, I'll move this to the
top right. Let me move this to top
right, so that it's better on view.
Right? So, I'll say
Okay, I've moved the terminal to top
right by,
uh you know, I I did a right click over
here on the terminal itself and I'll say
I said uh panel position and I moved it
to right instead of bottom. So, this
view is much better, I feel, right? So,
here now I'm going to say So, if you say
get status
you are going to see this is not
committed. So, I'm going to say get add
and then I'm going to say get commit and
AM you know, uh and I'm going to make
say hello
node
ci.yaml,
like so. Okay? This is my commit
message. That is what I'm mentioning.
Simple commit message.
Okay, so this is uh
not added. It says this is not tracked.
I'll make use of UI to make sure it's
tracked. I I know using command why is
it not coming in, but if you see get
status now,
Okay, it's added now. I'll commit this
and I'll say get push.
So, let us see what happens when we
push. So, I've pushed it. Let us see
over here
under workflow runs. Oops, so one thing
I forgot over here, one thing I forgot
and you have to like come to settings
over here. Okay, come to settings.
Scroll down and just make sure you go to
secrets and variables and actions over
here because we have we are making use
of variables over here, right? And add
these two variables that you are using
in the actions file. I've just added
this Docker password and Docker
username. So, these two things we are
using over here, right? So, if you come
to the code and if you scroll down,
these two things like you are using
Docker username and Docker password
here, right? So, just be sure to add
both of these and only then it'll make
sure that it runs. So, you can see it's
running now.
And just come over here. Okay, so the
build has failed. Why is Why has it
failed?
Okay.
Uh there is some problem.
So, this probably has happened because
on my machine
I feel uh
the Okay, can only install Okay, so the
problem is my package.json and
package-lock.json are out of sync. That
is what the problem is. What I need to
do is I need to say rm
hyphen
rf and I'll remove node modules.
Okay, node modules. So, right now I'm in
the node folder. Okay, where am I? I'm
in the node folder and I'm removing node
modules and package uh not package.json
but package-lock.json. I'm removing both
of this. Okay, so this is not going to
work on PowerShell.
All right, which is fine. So, what I'm
going to do is instead of like dealing
with the commands, I'm going to just
delete it from here. So, I'll delete
node modules first of all. This is
deleted. Package-lock.json also I will
delete. It's deleted. Okay, and I'll say
I'll run npm install over here so that
both the files are recreated again.
Okay.
And uh you can see now both the files
are recreated. What I will do is I'll
say get add and I'll add a commit over
here, all right, like so.
And I'll say get push. Let us see now
what happens, okay? So, this issue can
happen because uh you know, package-lock
and package.json both were in sync
probably on my machine. So, that is why
it might have happened, all right? But
that is absolutely okay. Uh
we deal with errors, we evolve, we
learn. That's completely fine. And I
won't be painting a fake picture that no
one gets errors when it comes to
programming, all right? So, I'm not
going to edit this. I'm going to show
you all the debugging, everything live.
And you can see this workflow run is
happening now. It might fail. Okay, it
did not fail. It might fail. That's
completely fine. We will debug it and I
would be happy if it fails, you know,
because you all get to a chance to see
debugging as well.
Okay, so it's it's uh building the
Docker image, you can see.
Okay, it built the Docker image and it
pushed. So, both the steps have
succeeded. You can see clearly over
here. Both the steps have succeeded.
Okay? This first one took 10 seconds.
Then Docker build push waited for the
first step to complete because we had
marked it as dependent on the first
step. Right? So, it waited for the
previous step to complete. Once the
previous step was done, Docker build
push was executed and the code and this
thing was pushed, image was pushed. You
can go and check the logs if you wish to
by clicking over here and see what all
happened in every step. Okay? So, you
can see over here uh login was succeeded
with the right credentials. You saw
everything happening over here. You can
see.
You can see all the execution happened
over here, okay? And you can confirm if
the build was pushed over here. So, here
on the repo you can see last push was 1
month ago.
And for latest over here, last push was
1 month ago. Right? So, what I'm going
to do is I'm just going to simply
refresh.
Let us refresh.
And now you can see last push was less
than 1 day ago and it was pushed 1
minute ago. Can you see?
Just a minute ago all push was done. You
can see it's all updated over here.
So, this is uh how, you know, pipelines
are working over here. You can see,
right? And it's it's indeed fun to watch
this, you know? So, every time you make
any sort of code changes,
you know, this pipeline is going to run.
It is going to automatically test your
application. If there is any sort of
test failure, it is going to notify you
via email. If there is no failure, it is
going to build the Docker image and
fresh and and and it is going to push
it. Now, you can configure these
pipelines to a particular branch as
well. So, I can tie these pipelines to
the main branch and if there is any sort
of update or anything that is happening
onto the main branch, you know, it gets
triggered and uh things start happening.
So, here if you come, okay, I'll just
disable the terminal here. Okay,
terminal is gone. If you come over here,
you can configure this to a particular
path or a particular branch depending on
your uh preferences.
So, for example, here you can say
branches, okay?
Branches and here you can mention main
branch. So, if there is a push over to
main branch, only then this gets
executed. You can also mention path over
here. So, I've mentioned path. Okay, and
this will go in the next line
and here you will have the entire path
mentioned, okay?
All right, what happened? Unexpected
value path. Is it paths? Yes, it it may
be paths. Okay.
And now here you need to add the value,
okay? So, the value is this, right? So,
if there is any sort of code changes
in this particular path on main branch,
only then this pipeline gets triggered.
And I have also added workflow dispatch
over here purposely because since we are
learning, I would want to run this
pipeline manually as well. So, you can
disable this if that's the case, right?
But you can imagine, okay, the level of
control that you have access to. You can
mention any branches you want, you know,
you can mention multiple branches, you
can mention paths you want, you can
mention multiple paths, that's
completely fine. So, I can mention
multiple branches over here working as
well, okay? You can mention multiple
paths, that's completely okay. So, the
level of configuration and the level of
control that you get is insane over
here. Now, you can see I've mentioned
this. So, if there is any sort of change
on the main branch for this path, only
then this gets triggered. What I will do
is I will do a commit over here and I'll
push this.
Now, the changes have not been done. So,
you can see the changes have not been
done on main branch and neither the
changes have been done on this path.
Right? So, since the condition is not
matching, this won't run automatically.
I can guarantee you that. If I refresh,
you will see it's not running
automatically, right? So, you'll have to
manually run this now. So, you can go
over here.
Okay, sorry, not here.
But you will have to go over here.
And uh
second CI. Oops, I think I forgot
renaming the uh pipeline name. I'm sorry
about that. So, I can mention over here
uh you know, hello
node CI, okay? Also, I have one more
pipeline for Spring that is written. It
has hello Spring Boot app to Docker,
okay? So, I'm going to add the same
thing, hello uh node app to Docker.
Okay, something like this. And now I'll
make the changes. So, I'll say
here, commit, and then push, okay? This
is done. [laughter]
The code is gone, and now if you come
here
okay, this should be renamed. Oops, so
I'll go to actions.
And here you can see yeah, hello node
app to docker. So, if you click on this,
you're going to see the workflow has not
started automatically because we've
configured now for it to work on a
particular branch, if there any changes
on a particular branch, and at a
particular path. So, that has not
happened. If you make any changes there,
it will work. It will get triggered. But
now I can run this manually. I'll run
this manually. You can select the branch
and it runs manually. Why manually?
Because we've added this workflow
dispatch event trigger in the pipeline,
okay? And it's running manually and uh
you'll see a run appear over here, okay?
Or over here. You can see it's
initializing.
Okay. So, if you come over here, you can
see it's initializing. It's initialized
actually. Build happened for 8 seconds
and now it's a docker Now it's building
the image and uh pushing it.
Okay. And you're going to see the image
being pushed as well. Okay. So, yeah.
This is how you can have insane level of
control in an automated way. Imagine
this working in a production-grade
scenario. You have multiple branches of
feature branches, different developers,
different teams working on branches. And
uh whenever a feature is complete,
you merge all that code into main
branch. And main branch is actually
configured with pipelines that will
automatically, you know, build, test,
and then uh build docker image, and it
will deploy your app to production, you
know? So, you don't have to do anything.
You just have to make sure whatever
you're merging into the main branch is
the code that you want on production.
You just merge it and you are done. The
pipeline automatically triggers. It does
all the job. It is pushing docker image.
It's doing everything, right? You You're
seeing it hands-on. So, that's the
That's how production-grade teams work
in real-world scenarios. And this is
something You're getting a vibe of this,
right? And this is something very
important for you to understand and
experience. And I hope you all have
found this super valuable.
All right. So, now it's time where we
write pipeline to build and push our
Docker app our application in Python for
hello. Okay. So, this particular
application under Docker folder, which
is app1.hello and there is this Python
folder that you will find.
Now, this is a main application. Okay.
This is the file.
And here we have a Dockerfile as well.
Okay. So, what I'm going to do is I am
going to create a pipeline over here.
I'm going to just duplicate this second
pipeline here. Okay. I'm going to rename
this file over here. So, let us rename.
I'm going to say hello.
And I'm going to say
Python
_ci. Something like this. Okay. And I'll
also have a nice name for this
particular pipeline.
So, here
I'm going to say hello.
Python app to Docker. Okay. So, make
sure you have a good name. This name can
be anything. It will be visible to you
on the UI of GitHub Actions. Okay.
Now, when do I want to trigger this
particular pipeline? So, I want to
trigger this on push.
And since I have multiple events over
here, I will end this with a colon.
Okay. Now,
let's start planning the pipeline. Okay.
So, here what we have done is we have
defined the name. We have said on push
or workflow dispatch. Workflow dispatch
means you can run this pipeline
manually. Okay. And push meaning if any
sort of push event occurs across the
repository, it is going to run this
pipeline. Right? Fair enough. Now, if
you come over here, we have job over
here, which is build. I would want to
create a job over here, which is called
as build test. So, I'll say build test.
Okay. And I'll say runs on Ubuntu. So,
this is going to run on Ubuntu machine.
And there are certain steps that I wish
to define over here. Right? So, the
number one step is uh check out code.
Okay. I will make sure I get rid of this
echo statement uh that I have over here.
That's something I'll get rid of, okay?
So, this is what I've defined here. And
uh then here
I'm going to paste this. So, first step
is check out code because we need to see
whatever is getting provisioned over
here, this runner over here is if is
like a fresh machine. It does not have
anything. And to work with our code, we
are going to need uh the code as well,
right? So, we're going to check out the
code, and this step this job is about
building and testing the application.
So, for building and testing the
application, you are anyways going to
need the code. So, that is something you
need. Then I'm going to have uh one more
thing over here. I'm going to say set up
Python. So, this in this step, we are
going to set up Python.
And uh
then let us have a few extra lines here,
and I'll paste this thing again.
Okay, like so.
Set up Python, check out the code, and
then I'm going to install dependencies.
Okay, this is how you would be building
the application. And then over here,
we're going to run the test, okay? So,
we can run test like so.
Okay? So, what are we doing? Uh we are
actually check doing a check out for
code. We are setting up Python. We are
installing the dependencies, and we are
running the test, right? This is done.
Now, I would want to copy this entire
job over here because we would need one
more job to build and uh push the Docker
image. Okay? So, here I'm going to say
I'm going to name this job as Docker
build push, okay?
Build and then push, like so. Okay? And
it is going to have its own series of
steps. So, first step is going to be
check out code because see, every job
you have in your pipeline. So, your
pipeline can have multiple jobs. This is
the first job that I have. Within job,
you have steps. This is the second job I
have and it is going to have its own
steps, right? So, this job is going to
run on its independent machine, right?
And once this job is complete, this is
going to run on a separate machine. So,
this is a fresh machine. So, we will
have to
check out the code first, right? So,
that job is for building and testing the
application. This job is for uh
containerizing the application and
pushing it to Docker Hub or whichever
registry you are using. We'll be using
Docker Hub here.
You can use any, right? So, to push the
image, to build and push the image, you
need the code first. So, that is what we
have got. You need to log in to Docker
Hub. So, I'll say log in to Docker Hub
like so.
And then [snorts] I'm going to build and
push the image. So, here I'm going to
say build and push image like so. Okay.
This is done and then I'm going to get
rid of this, right?
So, yeah.
Two jobs, build and test, these are the
steps and then Docker build and push,
these are the steps, right? I'll save
this.
Now, what we need to do is we need to
have the code for every step, right? So,
first step is check out code. So, what
I'm going to do is I'm going to come to
GitHub Actions Marketplace.
And of course, we are going to make use
of uh like reusable GitHub Actions. So,
here on the Marketplace, just make sure
you select all actions over here under
actions, right? You select all actions.
And then over here, you can search for
check out. So, we'll get all the actions
for check out. So, you can see check out
over here.
Okay.
Now, here
if you scroll down, you will get the
usage as well. So, you can just copy
this usage like so.
And uh you can come over here and for
check out code, you can just paste it
over here like so.
Okay.
Like so.
I'll do a tab, okay?
And uh yeah, this is it.
So,
we've done this, okay? And, uh I need to
mention
the repository. I don't need to mention,
okay? Because the default repository is
the repository that we are on. So, I
won't add any sort of parameters. Okay?
I'll just get rid of all of this. Okay?
So, I'm just checking out the code. We
have done a code checkout. Now, we need
to set up Python. Now, to set up Python,
what we need is we need a action again.
So, I'm going to come over here. And
here, I'm going to search for Python.
Right? If you search for Python, you
will get this official uh action over
here for set up Python. Just come over
here.
Okay? And you can see how this is being
used. All right? So, I'll just copy this
over here. This much.
Or you can copy this entire steps over
here, okay? So, I'll I'll just take this
entire thing.
Come over here.
And for setting up the Python, here,
like so.
You do this. Right?
And, uh here, what I'm going to do is
I'll select all.
And, uh here,
I'm going to say, okay. I'm going to get
rid of this
steps over here.
Okay? So, I have name set up Python. I
don't need this hyphen now, okay? I'm
going to say uses checkout v6, okay? So,
this is not needed.
And actions set up Python.
Okay? With Python version, you can
mention. And here you have the command
as well, okay? So, I don't want this as
well. I'll just get rid of this, okay?
So, right now we are just setting up
Python. So, I'll just focus on that. I'm
saying this is the action that we want
to use
with Python version 3.13.
Okay? You can change this version to
whichever version you wish to make use
of. All right? Uh but if you're watching
this video at any particular point in
time where in there are new Python
releases that have happened, that's
absolutely okay. You can just change the
version. And this version might also
change for the action. That is
completely fine. It's important you
understand the concept. See, this
version changes is fine, right? So, this
is done. Then you install the
dependencies over here.
You say working
directory
like so. And uh you mention the
directory and here you mention the run
command. Now, why are we mentioning
working directory over here?
See, to install dependencies, you would
be running the command. And in fact,
I'll be running multiple command, not
one. So, I'm going to add a pipe over
here. Go to the next line. And I'm going
to say Python
{hyphen} m. This is a command for
Python. I'm going to say pip install
upgrade.
And I'm going to say pip. Okay? So, this
is going to install all the dependencies
along with the upgrade. And I'm going to
say pip install {hyphen} r
requirements.txt.
Because we have some requirements over
here in our application. You can see
requirements.txt.
So, this app that we are running needs
Flask. Right? So, all these
requirements, whenever you update the
requirements file also, all those will
get installed. Right?
So, this is being done. Okay? And uh
once this is done,
So, what have we done? We've done uh
package upgrades.
And we have installed all the
requirements. So, this is done. Now,
what we need to do is we need to set up
the working directory. Because this has
to be executed in the working directory
where our app exist. So, what is our
working directory? Working directory is
Docker
app one {hyphen} hello
{slash} Python.
Like so. Okay?
So, Docker is over here. Okay, so when
you check out the code on the machine,
okay, the runner that gets provisioned,
you will have Docker folder. So, I'm
saying Docker app one hello, which is
app one hello, and under that you have
Python.
Right? So, there this command will be
executed. This is important. Otherwise,
if if set a working directory, okay, it
assumes the current directory.
And you don't have requirements.txt in
the current directory, so it's important
that you uh mention the working
directory, or else you mention the
complete path of where requirement.txt
is there. I hope this makes sense,
right? So, that is what we are doing.
And now, what we need to do is we need
to run uh the test over here. So, what
I'm going to do is I'm going to say
I'm going to say Python
-m py_compile,
and I'm going to say main.py. So, I'm
I'm in a way running the smoke test,
okay? You can say whatever kind of test
you are running
you can mention that. So, this is going
to compile the entire uh file over here,
and of course, we again need to set
the working directory as well, because
this command needs to be triggered in
this particular directory, right? So,
this is done.
And then, if you scroll down, so this is
actually done. This This entire job is
done over here of building and testing
the application, right? So, you can see
how this is working. Here, you can check
out the code. Here, you are setting up
the Python. Then, you are installing the
dependencies, and then you are running
this test over here. That is done.
Right? Now, you need to build and push
the Docker image, okay? So, for that, we
again need to check out the code, and we
already have written the step for that.
So, I'll just copy this.
I'll come over here
and I'll check out the code here, like
so.
And then, I'll log in to Docker Hub. So,
for logging to Docker Hub, it it's a
process. So, we won't be writing
commands for that, but in fact, uh there
are ready-made actions for this. So,
I'll come over here to the marketplace,
and here, just search for Docker.
Like so.
If you search for Docker, you're going
to see Docker login as one of the action
which you can make use of. If you scroll
down, you're going to see over here uses
login action and you can
make use of username and password. So,
it accepts username and password of a
Docker Hub. So, I'll copy this.
Okay.
And I'll paste it over here like so.
Okay.
And once you do this, oops, so actually
I should not have selected everything
but only this much. Okay, once you do
this, it's all sorted.
And I think this is it.
Okay.
So, now this is done. We login to Docker
uh Docker Hub and you can see over here
we have vars and secrets. So, I'll have
both of them referred as secrets over
here. And instead of Docker Hub
username, I'm going to say Docker
{underscore} username.
And instead of Docker Hub token, I'm
going to say Docker password.
Now, both these variables you need to
create
over here. So, you need to come over
here. Before having the workflow run,
you need to go to settings over here.
Under settings, if you scroll down, you
have uh secrets and variables and select
actions. So, these are secrets and
variables for actions. And here you have
to make sure you create Docker password
and Docker username. I've already
created this. You need to say new
repository secret. Just add Docker
{underscore} username and enter your
username and uh Docker {underscore}
password and enter your password. Okay.
My username is decode007 right now with
which I'm working, right? So, you have
uh this Python image over here that I've
pushed. Okay. So, this is where I'm
going to push it. But, I'm making use of
this username. Okay. So, you use that,
you add that and you are referring to
that over here. So, make sure the names
are same. If there is a name mismatch in
what you've added on github.com under
secrets and if you've mentioned some
other name over here, it's going to
create trouble or it's going to trouble
you, right? So, this is done.
Now, what we would do is we would build
and push the image. Now, for building
and pushing also, you have a ready-made
action. So, you can see over here, build
and push the Docker image.
So, if you see this action, if you
scroll down,
okay?
Here, you will see
a little bit more steps. I'm not going
to take all the steps, but we are going
to take only last thing for building and
pushing. So, I'll just copy this,
come over here,
and here, I'm going to paste this.
Right?
And just use tab over here. So, this is
done. Okay, so build and push image.
And this is the action that is getting
used with
uh push is true. So, I I want to push
this. Okay, I also have an option to set
the context over here. So, if you scroll
down, you can set the context. Right?
So, since our application has Docker
file defined, you can see Docker file is
defined. I would want to set the
context, right? Where uh the image
building process should happen. Or uh
generally, when you build images with
Docker, you have to give context. I'm
going to say context here.
And I'll enter the path of the folder.
So, this is the path of the folder.
Right, so.
Okay, so this is done.
I've mentioned the context, and now push
is true. I need to mention the tags.
I can mention the tag over here. I'll
add a pipe, and uh I'm adding pipe
because I can add multiple tags later
on. Right? But if you don't want to add
multiple uh tags later on, you can just
mention without pipe as well. That's
completely fine. So, I'm going to tag it
with my username. Okay, I'm not
hardcoding my username. You can see over
here. I'm not hardcoding my username.
So, I'm getting my username and slash
What is the name of the repo? Username
slash hello Python. So, I'll copy this,
and then I'll say hello Python, and then
colon latest, like so.
Okay, so this is done.
Right? So, this is how the entire
pipeline or this is what the entire
pipeline will look like. So, you can see
over here,
the name of the pipeline. I'll just take
you through all the steps so that if
there is something that you are not
clear on, it it goes clear, right? So,
here the name is what we have defined.
This is the name with which you can
refer to this pipeline. Oh, this is the
name with which uh you are going to see
the pipeline in the UI on getup.com,
right?
What is a trigger? When should this
pipeline be triggered? On push, like any
sort of push in this repo, it should be
triggered. Of course, you can customize
this and go a bit granular, and you can
say, "Okay, I want uh this to be
triggered only on uh
uh only if the
if there is a push on this branch, or
only if there is there are any sort of
changes at this path in the code on the
repo. Only then I want to trigger this,
which of course you can, but right now
I'm not adding that. And I've added
workflow dispatch, because if you want
to run this manually, you can even you
should be able to run that. You can get
rid of this in production grade
scenarios if you don't want to have uh
manual runs in your uh pipelines, right?
So, you can get rid of that. Jobs over
here.
Okay, uh you have uh two jobs. One is
build test, and other is docker build
push.
Okay. So, here in build test, it runs on
Ubuntu latest.
These are the steps. Okay, so you have
uh
check out code over here. Okay, so you
first check out the code, then set up
the Python,
and then install the dependencies for
Python, and then run smoke test for the
Python app, right? So, you're using
actions a lot. These are reusable
actions that you're using for checking
out the code,
for setting up Python. You have
mentioned Python versions. These are the
parameters of the inputs that you're
giving to the action.
Then you have you are setting up the
working directory, and you are
mentioning these two commands. Now, why
have I mentioned pipe over here? Because
I want to run two commands, right? If I
don't mention pipe, I can run only one
command, right? So, for me running it as
two commands, I've added the pipe over
here. So, what I'm doing is I'm
upgrading pip,
and I'm upgrading packages, and then I'm
uh doing requirements.txt install,
right?
So then and we are running the test,
okay? This is good.
Then if you scroll down for Docker
building and pushing and checking out
the code because it's a fresh new
machine that gets provisioned.
I'm
logging in to Docker Hub and here I'm
making use of actions again and I'm also
making use of secrets that will be
configured on
the UI, okay? Make sure you configure
these in the way I've shown you. And
then I build the build and push the
image.
Okay? So I've added pipe over here as
well because if I want to add more tags,
I should be able to. So if I want to add
one more tag over here, I should be able
to, right? All those things I can
control.
This is done. Now what I would do is I
would get this added into you know
into GitHub and I can commit it from
here only. So I can say hello
_python_ci.yml
over here.
Okay? This is my commit message. I'll
just say commit
and I'll get this pushed.
Okay?
Now this is syncing the changes. The
push is happening.
Okay?
And what I will do is I'll come over
here and we can see all the workflow
runs over here as well, okay? So you
would see the run happening over here
for Python. And what is going to happen
is it is going to take the repo. It is
going to provision
uh
uh provision a machine and I think we
missed one thing. So we have not created
dependency between both. So that's one
problem that we did.
Okay? But let me
do that over here. So if you come over
here
you can see
this
uh like this particular job is not
dependent or not waiting for this
particular job to finish. So we need
that to happen. So what I will say is
I'll say needs over here. And I'll say
build hyphen test like so.
Okay? Once we do that, I'll again do a
commit over here. So, I'll say hello
underscore python
underscore CI dot YAML like so.
And I'll commit this.
This is done, and I'll say push.
Okay? This is done, and once this is
pushed now, okay? So, you can see it was
not
uh it was not dependent. So, docker
build push was executed along with build
test.
It did not wait for 9 seconds for build
test to complete. But now, in the next
run, you're going to see it's waiting
for build test to complete. And both are
separate jobs, and docker build push is
dependent on build test.
Okay? Can you see this? And if you go
inside, you're going to see all the logs
as to what things happened, whatever
happened. You can click on this, and you
can see all the uh output over here,
right? You can see
everything over here.
All the logs. If there are any sort of
errors also, you can debug from here,
okay? If you come over here, the
building and pushing of docker image,
you can click on this, and you're going
to see all the logs.
Okay?
Here.
Like so.
Okay?
Uh and the building the image also, you
you can see over here. So, all of these
logs you can check, and you can see both
are successful.
Right so.
Like so, right? And if you come over
here, you can see last push over here
was 1 month ago.
Okay? And for latest, you can see this
was 2 months ago. So, if you refresh
this, you'll see a build push happen
just about 1 minute ago. You can see 1
minute ago, latest push pushed, and last
push was 1 minute ago.
So, this coming in with the help of CI
pipelines that we have configured over
here. You can see we are pushing it in
the latest tag. You can add more tags if
you wish to, but that's completely okay.
And now you can even get granular
control. Like for example, see this is
for the Python application, right? And
there are the repository huge. There are
tons of applications here. For example,
here only you can see app one, app two.
There is code for Kubernetes, right?
Now any sort of change in Kubernetes
file, I don't want this pipeline to run.
Right? When should this pipeline run?
This pipeline should only run when there
is change in the
when there is change in the Python code.
Okay, that to follow the hello app. So
what you can do is you can customize or
you can add some configurations over
here. You can say push and then you can
say paths. And here you can mention the
path. So I'll mention this as the path
over here. This entire thing over here.
Like so. Okay, and you can even control
the branch over here.
Okay, you can say branch.
And okay. Branches and you can say
hyphen
and main. Like so. Okay. So this What
this will do is any sort of push on main
branch
with changes in this path only will
trigger the CI/CD pipeline. And we also
have workflow dispatch because if we
want to run this manually since we are
learning this, we should be able to do
that. So now if I commit anything over
here, you're going to see
like nothing
like it won't automatically run. Let me
show this to you. Okay. So here if I say
hello Python
CI
.yml
Okay, I commit this. And if I push this
This is pushed, but did the changes
happen in this particular folder? No.
Did the changes happen on main branch?
No. Where did it happen? It happened in
workflows folder for .github.
So the automated workflow or the
automated trigger is not going to happen
for this particular pipeline. You can
see over here. It did not run
automatically.
You can go to all workflows and also
see.
Right, it did not run automatically.
Okay? So, the configuration has been
applied. Now, what you can do is if you
want to run it manually, you can go to
this pipeline.
And you can click over here, hello
Python app to Docker, and you can say
run the workflow.
So, this is going to run the workflow
manually. It is also going to allow you
to select the branch on which it should
run, like you saw in the UI. Okay?
Whenever you say
run, you can select the branch, right?
And once you do that, okay, it's it's
going to run. So, you can see now the
run has appeared. And if you go inside,
you can see this is waiting for build
test to complete. And now it's building
the Docker image and pushing it.
Okay? This ended in 10 seconds, and the
second stage or the second job awaited
for 10 seconds for the first job to
finish because we have added that needs
tag right in the configuration. So, it
waited, and now it is building this
image, and it is going to push it over
here.
You should see a push happening over
here. Okay? So, you can see the push
happened.
And if you refresh, you can see
the last pushed less than a minute ago.
You can see less than a minute ago.
Pushes are happening. Okay? You can
click on this and see the history if you
wish to.
Okay, it won't show the history. Okay.
But that's okay.
You get the gist, right? So, yeah, this
is how things are functioning. Okay? You
can see the tags over here. You can see
1 minute ago over here. This was pushed.
Right? So, I hope this has been useful,
and I hope you understand how
production-grade applications work.
And with any sort of change,
you can configure this. So, for example,
I can configure this on main branch
at a particular path. And now whenever
like you will have multiple people
people in teams working on the same repo
across the different branches.
Whenever a feature is done, what you can
do is you you merge that feature branch
into main branch, and it will just do
the job. You know, this pipeline will be
triggered. So,
it it will not only be triggered if you
have deployment steps written, it will
also deploy it to the production, right?
So, you're just merging the code
and you would merge only when you want
those changes to go live. So, you're
only merging the code and the code is
taken from your machine to Docker Hub or
wherever whatever you have configured
and then to production.
Right? So, it's so automated. Imagine
doing the all of this manually.
Right? It's so automated. And
in real world, like real uh pipelines
look even more complex than this. Right
now, we are just building Docker images,
but if you have more steps, if you want
to conduct integration testing,
different sort of testing, you will
write different steps for that. Okay?
But, it's just written once.
And it's automated for life. You know,
you have to just make changes if you
wish to, but it's all automated. So,
that's the power of pipelines. I hope
this has been valuable and it has helped
you understand how production workflows
uh function in real.
So, now it's time where we start talking
about continuous deployment, which is
CD. So, the CI part, which is continuous
integration, and uh CD is continuous
deployment. So, what it is So, this is
the software development pipeline,
wherein you code, test, build, package,
push, deploy, and then verify. This is
how an ideal software development
pipeline uh functions and uh the steps
ahead of uh push. So, steps from uh
code, test, build, and package, this is
part of CI.
Okay? CI as in continuous integration.
Now, after package, whatever steps you
have is continuous deployment. And
continuous deployment means every
successful build is automatically
deployed to an environment without
manual intervention.
And this actually means
every build which you want to deploy or
which is successful gets deployed
automatically. There is no approve
button.
There is no manual intervention. If
tests pass, then test as in the test
cases that you might have written in
your application, if they pass and if
they are part of CI/CD pipeline, then
the code directly goes to the user.
Okay?
And uh
See, CI part over here, which is
continuous integration, ends with a
validated artifact. So, over here, if
you see the steps until package over
here. So, code, test, build,
package, okay? This is part of
you know, validated artifact. So, the
output that you get is a validated
artifact. Now, what is a artifact?
Artifact is an output that you get,
right? A deployable unit, right? So, it
can be in any form. It can be a Docker
image, a JAR file, or a build package,
if it's a Python application. It It can
be in any form. So, the output of CI is
artifact, and then CD takes that
artifact and starts from there.
Okay? CD as in continuous deployment.
So, it takes that artifact, starts from
there, and not from the source code
again. Okay? So, so this is uh what
continuous deployment means, and uh once
you are done with continuous
integration, it's time we start moving
our code or our uh product or
application to the production
automatically. And whenever you push the
code, the
The power of this pipeline is whenever
you push the code, whenever you make any
sort of changes, right? It There are
test cases that automatically run.
The application build automatically
happens. Application is packaged
automatically, whether that's a Docker
image or a JAR file, whatever form For
whatever form you have written the code
for, it gets packaged and then it gets
pushed, deployed, and verified
onto the production. Okay? Now, the
power over here is this pipeline is
completely configurable. Like you can
define which changes or what sort of
changes should trigger this entire
pipeline. For example, you can say,
"Okay, I want this pipeline to get
triggered on main branch and only for
changes at this particular path in the
source code."
And once that condition is met, only
then this entire pipeline is triggered.
All right? And it is triggered
automatically without any manual
intervention. That's the power of CI/CD,
which is continuous integration and
continuous deployment. I hope that makes
sense to you all.
So, now it's time we'll understand how
CI/CD talks to Kubernetes. Now, when I
say Kubernetes, I mean Kubernetes
clusters. See, you can have Kubernetes
clusters anywhere, right? On any sort of
cloud. You can have it on AWS, you can
have it on Azure, you can have it on
GCP, Google, right? So, how would your
CI/CD pipeline
deploy your application that you are
building using CI/CD and you wish to
deploy using CI/CD, how will it deploy
to your cluster?
How will it point to where there? So,
that is something we are going to
understand conceptually. And uh this
video is really important because this
will help you understand how deployment
to Kubernetes clusters in production,
development, and any kind of environment
works with the help of CI/CD. Okay? Now,
first of all,
I would want to talk a little bit about
something called as kube config. Okay?
Now, what is kube config? And I'll also
talk about kube cuddle. So, see, kube
cuddle, you if you have used Kubernetes,
if you are learning Kubernetes, or
deploying projects, whatever you are
doing with Kubernetes,
you must have used this command kube
cuddle, right? And when you are using
cube cutter command, you are actually
using a command line tool. You're
actually invoking a command line tool.
And this command line tool helps you
interact with Kubernetes cluster.
So, wherever your Kubernetes cluster is
located, it is going to help you
interact. So, you can create clusters,
delete clusters. You can do n number of
things, right? Now, one question I want
to ask you is how does cube cutter know
where your cluster is located? How does
cube cutter know
uh how it should authenticate uh to your
cluster? You know, see, clusters it's
not like anyone in the world can access
your cluster, okay? There is some sort
of authentication mechanism,
authorization mechanism that are in
place and that work behind the scenes
when you run this cube cutter command.
So, how does cube cutter authenticate
and how does it know, okay, this is
where your uh
clusters are? Okay? So, the answer to
this question is via cube config. Now,
cube config is a configuration file.
It's a config file or a configuration
file that tells cube cutter how to
connect to Kubernetes cluster.
Okay? It has all the information. It has
all the information that cube cutter
needs to connect to uh the clusters,
okay? That is what cube config is. So,
what's inside cube config? Okay? So, the
information is organized inside cube
config and it is organized into cluster
information. So, cluster information uh
gives the where part to uh cube cutter.
So, it contains the endpoint as to where
your cluster is located, your
certificate authority data uh that is
needed to connect to the cluster, okay?
Then, it also has users information and
credentials. So, for example, if you are
trying to connect to your Kubernetes
cluster, uh it should know who is trying
to connect, right? So, it contains your
credentials, it contains a client
certificate, bearer token, username,
password. All this sort of information
which is related to authentication
authorization, that is also there in
this cube config. Then you will also
have context information.
What does context information mean? It
means
It means See, at any point in time, if
you're working on Kubernetes, it's not
like you'll be connecting to a single
cluster.
Right? You can connect to one cluster.
Now, tomorrow you might want to connect
to another cluster. And then day after
tomorrow you might want to connect to
your local cluster. Right? So, these
multiple configuration for different
clusters are stored in the form of
context. And it's like a shortcut that
links a specific user to a specific
cluster. Okay? And see, if this context
information is not stored, okay? Then
what would happen is you as a user will
only be able to connect to one cluster
at any given point of time. There will
be no switching abilities. So, you as a
user you want switching abilities,
right? Today you should be able to
connect to cluster that is located on
AWS. Then tomorrow you should be able to
connect to some other cluster on AWS
itself. Then day after tomorrow I want
to connect to some cluster located on
Azure. Then after that I want to connect
to some cluster located locally. So,
this is managed via storing information
in the form of context, right?
And with this context information, you
can switch clusters, okay? So, these are
some information or some data points
that are that exist in cube config,
okay? And we use it, like I said, for
switching environments, for switching
environments meaning if you want to jump
between environments like development,
staging, productions. By switching
context you can do that. Automation, if
you want to automate things using CICD
pipeline, you can make use of cube
config files to authenticate and deploy
your code to clusters. Also, for
security, okay? So, it keeps your
credentials organized, separate from
kubectl. So, kubectl is a tool and kube
config is a configuration file which
exists separately, independently of
kubectl. Kubectl is making use of kube
config, okay? It does not have the
authentication information by itself.
All right? And also it has the ability
to connect to or it gives the ability to
connect to cluster using the
information, okay?
So, this is something some exists.
These are some points that exist. Now,
let's talk about some commands that you
should be aware of, okay? So, this first
command kubectl config view, if you run
this command, you will get all the
configuration that exists. Okay? Or all
the configuration that kubectl can exist
can access using kube config, okay? This
is one command. Second command is
kubectl config current context. So, this
will give you the current context as to
if you see, kubectl can point to
multiple
multiple clusters.
It can have multiple clusters
information, but where is it pointing at
any given point in time? That you can
get using current context, okay? Then
you can have you can switch context. So,
today if I'm connecting to
AWS servers, tomorrow I want to connect
to my local Docker desktop or Kubernetes
running on my local Docker desktop,
right? So, I can change the context
using this particular command kubectl
config use context and I can switch it
to something else wherever I want to,
okay? And
this is how it works and the where does
this kube config file exist? That is
also one of the question, where on your
machine? So, on Linux or Mac OS it is
going to exist on this particular path.
Windows, it is going to exist under user
profile. So, if your user profile is C
drive, users, home or C drive, users,
your name
and then within that it's going to have
dot kube folder and under that config
config folder, right? And that is where
the configuration is going to exist,
okay? So, by default these are the
locations where kubectl is going to look
for the kube config file. Right? Now,
the question is uh do you create cube
config file? No.
So, when is this particular
file created and how is it this created?
Okay. I'll give you some example. Let's
say if you're setting up a Docker
desktop.
Setting up if you're setting up
Kubernetes using Docker desktop. Then,
when you enable Kubernetes in Docker
desktop. See, it's not by default
enabled Kubernetes in Docker desktop. If
you enable it, okay? It is going to
create and set up cube config for you,
okay? And if you're using AWS, then when
you create the cluster, automatically
behind the scenes cube config file is
updated and the clusters information as
to what all
which clusters you're pointing to and
which clusters exist now will be updated
in the cube config configuration. So,
you are not doing it manually. You are
not updating cube config or creating
configurations manually. It's
automatically updated behind the scenes,
right? You never see it happening. You
never see the command, but it actually
happens. Okay?
Now, let us talk about what happens
with GitHub actions or inside GitHub
actions, okay? So, what happens is see,
a action runner. Whenever you you run a
CICD pipeline, there is a runner machine
that gets provisioned or runner gets
that gets provisioned. Now, what is a
runner? It is a brand new virtual
machine.
Does it have anything?
No, it does not have anything
pre-installed. It's a brand new virtual
machine. There is no memory that exists,
right? There is no file that exists and
there is no cube config that exists on
this particular runner machine, okay?
So, now on AWS, what we need to do is we
will have to run this command to create
update cube config for CICD. So, if If a
look at this command, AWS EKS. Now, this
is specific to AWS only, all right. And
we are talking about AWS, deploying
things on AWS, so that is why I'm
sticking to this concept of AWS. So, AWS
EKS update kubeconfig
hyphen two times, name, and we'll
mention the cluster name, whatever your
cluster name is, you can replace that
placeholder over here, and then the
region where your cluster is located.
So, after running this command, what
will happen is
we will have the kube config settings
updated.
Okay, uh on on the runner machine.
Now, this Make a note over here, this is
running using AWS CLI, for which you
need to be authenticated with AWS. Okay,
how are we going to do that? You will
know when we actually write CI/CD. Okay,
but for now, just remember that uh this
particular command is used to fetch the
cluster connection details from AWS, and
it will write them to your local kube
config. You don't run this. I I'm
repeating again, you don't run this
locally on your machine, because when
you create cluster, all of these
commands are executed in the background.
And uh for you, it's uh
you you don't need to run it. Okay, so
so it's all done in the background, but
if you want to update kube config
separately, manually, you need this
command. Okay, I hope uh this is clear
and useful.
All right, so now is the time wherein we
would want to create our AWS cluster.
Now, if you already have a AWS cluster
created, or EKS cluster is what I should
say. If you already have an EKS cluster
created onto Amazon or AWS, then you
don't need to follow this particular
step. So, we are creating the EKS
cluster. I hope you know the reason, to
deploy our application, okay, onto EKS,
using CI/CD. So, what I'm going to do is
I'm going to run a command. I'm going to
make use of EKS control, EKS CTL. I'm
going to just zoom in, so that you all
can see it clearly. Create cluster. Uh
and I'll say I'll mention the name over
here. Name you can mention any name. So,
I'm going to mention a simple name,
hello cluster. Okay, you can mention any
name of your choice and I'm going to
also mention region over here, AP hyphen
south hyphen one. You can choose the
region of your choice and then I'm going
to have nodes is equal to
uh nodes two. Okay, or you can have one
node. Uh so, I'm creating a cluster with
two nodes. And I'm going to say enter
over here. So, this is going to start
the entire process and uh it is going to
uh begin the setup. Uh and uh let me
tell you this is going to be a very
patient process. Okay, it's not like you
hit this command and it started and it
finished in seconds. Okay, you can see
uh I'm not seeing any sort of logs yet,
right? So, it's going to take a bit of
time and if you come over here uh to EKS
uh on Amazon, so if you go over here,
uh you are going to see I don't have any
clusters. So, if you have any cluster
created, you don't need to follow this
step. You can make use of that cluster
itself, like I said, right? Don't create
too many clusters uh because uh you're
going to be billed in the end for that,
right? Even if you have credits, your
credits will be utilized for that,
right? So, that's the thing and you can
see over here
on the
command line where we executed the
command, you can see it's uh begin it
has begun the process. Now, we'll wait
for a while until this entire process is
complete. Of course, this is going to
take like uh I should say 5 minutes in
my experience, uh 5 to 10 minutes. So,
I'll I'll be patient over here and uh
you'll have to be patient, too.
All right. So, it took us it took some
time, okay? And uh now you can see this
EKS cluster is created. It took some
time. I waited for at least like 5 to 10
minutes, okay? I don't know, but I
waited for a while. And now if you come
over here
and I'll just hit this reload button,
refresh cluster. So, I'll just reload
this and you will see a new cluster is
provisioned now. Right? Just So, the
practice that I follow is whenever I
need to deploy something and test
something, I create a cluster.
And then once I'm done working on the
project, I delete the cluster because
this is not something that I need to
keep uh live forever. You know, if
you're building something a service that
you're serving that is serving some
consumers, you need to keep that service
live. But this is just for learning and
demonstration purpose. So, I delete it
as well so that you know, I'm not uh I I
don't get any surprise bills from AWS.
That is really important when it comes
to utilizing cloud resources.
So, so yeah, cluster creation is done. I
hope uh you all have been able to follow
along.
So, now is the time where we deploy our
Hello Spring application to uh to the
Kubernetes cluster on AWS using CI/CD.
So, what I'm going to do is here, I'm on
my project and uh here if you go to K8S
uh folder under AWS, you already have
app one
Hello folder wherein we have already
written uh the configuration files,
okay? And this is written already. Uh
you can see this is a deployment file
and this is the service, all right? One
thing that we will have to change over
here is see, you are pushing, you're
creating the image, you're pushing the
image to your own uh Docker Hub
repository. So, what you will have to do
is you should not use the official image
over here. See, if you're making any
sort of changes, you should use your own
repo because that is where you are
deploying, constantly deploying uh your
new images, right? Now, if you're
working for an organization, if you're
working in a production-grade projects,
uh
this image
tag over here uh will be of your
organization and you will it's most
likely you will have access to push over
there. Right? But for now, we are
learning, so I'm demonstrating. So I
have a separate uh Docker Hub account
which is with a particular username.
Whichever whatever username you have,
you replace that over here. Okay? And
here in the pipeline where if So here
you can see I have the source code as
well for app one hello. That is fine.
Now here under workflows, I already have
the hello Spring CI. This is written.
Right? And it is pushing the app over
here. So after authenticating to Docker
Hub, it is pushing it to
your username {slash} hello Spring
latest. And also it is adding three four
three more tags or two more tags apart
from latest. But that's fine. What I
will do is instead of we'll we'll
develop this CI pipeline ahead to add
the steps for deployment. So I'll just
duplicate this. I won't make any changes
within that.
Okay? And I'll rename it over here. I'll
say
CI {underscore}
CD like so. Okay? And I'll get just get
rid of this and here I'm going to add
hello Spring Boot app to AWS EKS.
Something like this. So I'm naming it
uniquely so that it is easily
identifiable on GitHub Actions UI.
Of course, I have the push enabled
workflow dispatch enabled and any sort
of changes over here will trigger this
particular workflow. That is fine.
Now here if you review this YAML file,
we have two jobs. One is build test
which is responsible for building and
testing the application. It'll build the
application and test the application and
upload the test artifact and you can
access it right from the interface. Now
if this is successful, it is headed it
will head over to Docker build push
wherein after building and testing, the
next step is we build the image and push
it to remote registry, Docker Hub.
So that is what it does. You can see
over here. It checks out the code. It
gets the JDK. It builds the JAR. It logs
into Docker Hub. And then it is going to
build and push the image to Docker Hub.
So that is what we are doing. Now what I
need to do is I need one more job to be
created for the CD part which is the
deployment continuous deployment part.
What I'm going to do is I'm going to
just copy this much over here this much
over here.
I'm going to come down like so.
And here.
I'm going to paste this, okay. Instead
of docker build push, I'm going to say
deploy.
AWS EKS over here, okay, something like
this and this depends on build test. I'm
going to rename this this depends on
docker.
Build. Push.
Something like this, okay.
So here we are deploying the code, okay,
so this is the job that I've created and
it's dependent on the previous step
where then we are building and pushing
the docker image. And now let us define
the steps, okay. So first of all I'll
just have a few.
Okay, what I will do is I'll create few
steps.
Over here, okay, like so.
And I'll paste this over here, paste
this.
Paste this and then paste this, okay,
this is fine.
Now let us define this, okay, so why am
I getting this error? This is already
defined.
Okay, steps you cannot replicate steps,
I'm sorry. This need not be replicated
you already only need.
You don't need the steps keyword in
short, okay, I'm sorry for replicating
that, okay. So I have few steps over
here. Now first step over here this is a
fresh runner machine, right? This is a
fresh runner.
Okay, it is. Making use of Ubuntu
latest, so I first need my source code
so that I can access all the files,
right?
Second step would be to configure.
AWS credentials like so.
Okay.
Then the third step would be to set up
cube cuddle.
Okay, or cube control whatever you call
it.
And then the next step would be to
update cube config for EKS.
Okay.
And then the last Sorry, second last
step will be to verify the connection.
This is for verifying if you're able to
connect to
EKS over here. And then I'll say
after verifying deploy
to AWS.
Okay. And this will be Kubernetes.
Okay. This is done. So, what I'm going
to do is let's review the steps. First,
I'm going to get the source code onto
this new runner.
Then I'm going to configure the AWS
credentials. Now, why are we configuring
AWS credentials? We are configuring AWS
credentials so that we can authenticate
with AWS. Now, the question is why do we
want to authenticate with AWS? Why can't
we just connect using uh you know, cube
cuddle? We cannot because
we need uh so, to set up cube cuddle,
we're going to run the command which is
going to make use of AWS CLI. And for
that, we need to configure AWS
credentials. Okay. And then we need to
set up cube cuddle when we'll be
installing cube cuddle. And then we'll
update the cube config for EKS. This is
a simple command that we run.
We'll verify the connection whether this
connection is working fine. And then we
will deploy to AWS.
Okay. So, let us go step by step over
here. So, first thing is over here for
checking out the code. For the code
checkout, this is fine.
Then let's talk about configuring AWS
credentials. Now, how do you configure
AWS credentials? So, for for this, like
you must have already imagined you
already have a GitHub action. So, come
over here to action marketplace.
Go to all actions here.
And search for AWS
like so.
Okay. Now, over here you can see uh this
is the verified one, configure AWS
credentials. And we just go over here.
Okay. So, if you scroll down, you're
going to see how you can use it.
Here.
You can see how you can use it. Get up
AWS actions, configure AWS credentials,
and you have a version over here.
Right? So, if you scroll down, I wish to
make use of the secret key and access
key over here.
Okay, secret key and access key. So, we
are going to make use of it this way.
Okay, secret key
and access key. So, you can see assume
role with static IAM credentials in
repository secrets. So, you just copy
this.
Just come over here.
Okay, so this is configure AWS
credentials. I'll just replace that with
this. Okay, something like this.
Indentation is an issue.
So, I'll just do tab over here, and it's
all sorted. Okay? So, you can see over
here, configure AWS credentials, we are
making use of this action over here,
right? And then you can see the
parameters. One is access key ID, and
then secret access key over here. That
is what we are passing. And then the
region also, right? And now region, I
don't want it to be US East 2. This has
to be exact same region region where
your cluster is located. So, I'll say AP
South 1.
This is where my cluster is located.
Okay? Now, of course, this access key
and secret access key, we will have to
configure on the UI against the
repository. So, we'll do that shortly.
Okay, set up kubectl. So, I'll just copy
kubectl, come over here.
And I'll just close this. Here, I'm
going to search for kubectl like so.
Okay, so here you'll see a few
responses. Now, here you can see kubectl
tool installer. So, just open this
here like so.
And we'll copy this uses setup kubectl
at the rate version 4. You can pass in
some parameters like version and all. I
don't want to pass that. So, I'm just
going to come here. It is not needed.
So, I'll just paste this. So, it will
set up kubectl for us on this particular
machine. Okay? Now, what I'm going to do
is I need to update kube config over
here for EKS.
Now, for this we are not using action,
but we are going to run a command
manually. Okay, so I'm going to say a
pipe symbol. On next line, I'm going to
say AWS EKS update
cube config like so.
I'm going to say name over here and I'm
going to add my cluster name here and
I'm going to say region
and AP South hyphen one.
Okay. Now you can mention your cluster
name over here, hello
hello cluster something like this.
Whatever your name is you can add over
here. If you don't want to hardcode your
cluster name, what you can do is you can
also
add this via uh GitHub secrets. That
also you can do if you want this to be
fully configurable, right? But I'm just
adding uh hello cluster over here. I'm
hardcoding it in the
uh in the pipeline over here. And then
you need to verify the
connection. So what I will do is I'll
run a simple command over here. I'll add
this and here I'll say
uh or
pipe is actually not needed. So I'll say
cube cuddle
and I'll say get nodes like so. Okay,
this is done.
And then I'll deploy this to AWS. Now
how would you deploy this to AWS? So I'm
going to say run
over here
and here I'm going to say cube cuddle
apply
hyphen F
I'm going to
apply the files. Now where are the
files? So we have checked out the code,
right? So the files exist in K8S AWS app
one hello. Right? So I'm going to say
K8S
AWS app one
hyphen hello like so.
Okay. So this is exactly like you're
running cube cuddle command on your
machine. This is how you would also
deploy it locally, right? So right now
this command is being executed on the
runner, so it's as good as being
executed locally, right? So I hope this
is making sense what we did. Okay. Now
let us configure the secrets. Now how do
you get these secrets? So, come over
here.
Okay.
And uh go to uh just just verify you
have cluster up and running. Okay. And
uh what you can do is uh in fact, what
you can do is I would prefer not
hardcoding and getting the cluster out.
Okay. I don't know why I get that
feeling that we should get the cluster
out. So, you can you can get the cluster
out, but I I I I think I'll leave it
here. Yeah, right. If you want, you can
you know how to. Okay. So, here now we
need what we need? We need the secret
and the access key. So, I'm going to go
to IAM. Go to IAM.
Just see the user that you have. Okay.
So, what user you have? I have few
users. So, I'm going to go to admin
courses. This is my user for recording
courses. It has admin access. So, I'm
going going to go to security
credentials.
Okay. And I'm going to create an access
key. So, just create an access key here.
And just select command line interface.
And just say I understand the above
recommendation and just get this key
Okay. It's asking you for a tag value.
So, I'm going to say GitHub actions CI
CD. So, you can add a tag value and this
explains the purpose of access key as to
why this is being created. So, later on
if you review all the access keys, you
know, okay, this access key is for this
purpose. So, I'm saying GitHub GitHub
actions CI CD. Create the access key.
Now, this access key, you don't try to
use this access key. This is specific to
my account. I'll be deleting this access
key, by the way. So, just copy this
access key.
Okay. Come over here.
Come over here to your repository. Okay.
And uh here I just go to settings.
And I just go to
secrets and variables, actions. And
here, create a new repository secret.
So, just paste this secret over here.
And what is the name of
the secret that you are trying to
access? The one is access key ID.
Okay. So, just add the access key ID.
Okay. Then the next secret is that you
need to create is AWS secret access key.
Okay? So, here if you come
you'll create a new secret access key.
Okay? And you got access to the secret
access key over here. So, just copy
this. Okay? Just copy this and simply
paste and add the secret over here.
Now, remember these secrets are really
secret. Okay? So, don't expose this to
anyone. Don't tell this to anyone
because it's as good as sharing your
password. Anyone can access your AWS
account and turn on the resources.
All right? Your secret is your
responsibility. So, this is done. This
is configured. Right? What else do we
need? Do we need anything else?
I don't think we need anything else. I
think we are all good over here.
Okay? So, what I'm going to do is I'm
going to go to terminal.
I'm going to say get add. Okay?
And then, uh let us run a commit over
here. So, I'm going to say get commit.
For the AM and I'm going to say I'm
going to put in the name of the file,
hello spring CICD.yaml.
Okay? And I'm going to push it.
Okay, only one file changed. Why is that
so?
Okay, let me see where I am, which
folder I'm in. Okay, I need to come a
bit ahead.
Okay, let me see.
Okay.
Now, I think I'm in the right folder,
the DevOps.
Okay, DevOps masterclass.
Clear.
Okay.
And I'll say get status. Okay.
Okay, get state Okay, this is not saved.
The problem is this file is not saved.
You can see that is why it's not coming
in the commit.
This file needs to be saved. You can see
this dot over here
around the closure. It's not saved. So,
I'll save this and now
it should come as the edited file. Yeah,
makes sense. So, what I will do is
I will now add a one more commit and now
I'll do a push over here. Okay, push.
And once we do the push, what is going
to happen? The pipeline is going to
trigger itself. So, I'll come over here.
And let us go to actions.
Right, the pipeline will trigger.
Okay, this is absolutely okay. Access
secret key. Okay. It's fine.
I'll come over here. Let us see if the
workflow is triggered. Is this
triggered? Okay, it's not triggered.
Okay, you can see hello Spring Boot app
to EKS.
Okay, it's not triggered manually
because I believe, let me check, it's
not triggered manually. There is a
reason for that.
So, it should trigger if there is change
in this particular path, hello Spring.
Okay, so there is no change in this part
and that is why it's not triggered. So,
what we will have to do is we will have
to run this workflow manually. Okay, so
I'm running this workflow manually and
let us see what the output looks like.
Okay, so now the run will be triggered.
Okay, I'll go over here, all the
workflows. And now I'll go inside this.
I hope you get the understanding as to
why this was not triggered manually
because we have configured this
particular workflow to work on only if
there is change in a particular branch
on a particular path, which did not
happen in our push. So, that is why it
was not triggered. And it's good you
have workflow dispatched also added so
you can trigger this manually. So, I'm
getting this triggered manually and you
can see the application was built
successfully. Right?
And it's actually pushing to Docker Hub
now.
Okay, let us see how this is going.
Okay.
It's building the JAR for Docker right
now and then it's going to log in to
Docker Hub. So, JAR building process is
taking a bit of time, but it should
ideally deploy successfully without any
issues. You can see it's pushing the
image
to Docker Hub. Okay, it's pushed. You
can see.
Right? And you should be able to verify
this
um by visiting Docker Hub as well. Okay,
it's done. You can see the push is done.
So, if you come over here and if you do
a refresh, okay? You will see the last
push was less than a minute ago.
Can you see this? Right? Less than a
minute ago, which is good. So, we have
latest version being pushed and this
job is done. Now, let's go to deploy AWS
EKS. So, you can see over here, it's
Okay, the deployment is also done
almost. You can see. It verified the
connection. You can see over here.
Right? It updated cube cube config.
Okay, so let us go through all the
steps. So, first is it configured
Okay, so first it checked out the code,
which is okay. It got the code. And
before that there were some housekeeping
steps like setting up the job and
setting up the runner. You can see the
runner image and everything was set up.
Then configure AWS credentials. So, we
proceeded with the authentication. Then
cube cuddle was set up. So, that set up
was done over here. You can see.
And then we updated cube config for AWS.
So, you can see added a new context.
This is the context that was added over
here in this particular location, which
is good.
Then we verified the connection. So,
when we ran this command, you can see we
got this output. There are two
pods running, which is good. Two nodes
running, I'm sorry. Okay? And then we
deployed this to AWS Kubernetes. You can
see it was deployed. This is the output.
And then we
uh okay, this is post job clean up.
Okay, which is good. So, it's deployed
to AWS right now. And if you go to
terminal over here, okay? So, this is
the cluster creation command. I'm just
going to clear this.
Now, you can say cube cuddle
get pods.
You can see there will be two pods that
are running. Why there are two pods
running? Because we have two replicas
configured
uh in we have two count of two
configured in our YAML file, right? So,
that is why they are running. And uh
then you can say if you want to access
this service, you can say SVC.
We'll get the service URL using this.
You can see this is the service URL.
Look at this entire piece of Okay, I'll
copy this. We'll come over here.
And we'll come over here. Okay.
So here I'll paste this.
And I'll also make sure this is not
HTTPS. This is HTTP only. Okay, this is
not a secured connection. And now you
can see this is the output. Right? So
isn't this amazing? We made one simple
change.
If you make one simple change, this is
going to go automatically via CICD
pipeline from your local machine to
GitHub repository, from there to Docker
image. It is going to build and test it
first, of course, before creating Docker
image. It is going to very be verified
first.
Then it is going to go into an image
form and it will be pushed to Docker Hub
because we have configured Docker Hub.
And then from there it's going to be
deployed to AWS.
Okay.
So
how how does it feel you have your first
app deployed to EKS on AWS using a CICD
pipeline in an automated way? Now, of
course, this pipeline that we have
written will be much more complex when
you work on a production grade scenario.
But it's important you understand the
steps, you understand how it works, you
understand what we are doing. That is
really important. And once you get that
gist, okay,
everything becomes a cakewalk. Okay. So
it it's understanding concept is
important. See, whenever you are
learning tech, a new tech, whenever you
are doing something, building something,
it's important you understand the
concept first.
Because once you understand the concept,
you have
a lot more ability to do complex things.
Because now you understand behind the
scenes, you now understand how things
are working. You're You're actually
doing it with me. So you're going to
win.
I hope this has been useful.
All right, so now it's time we deploy
our Node.js application to Kubernetes
using CI/CD. Okay? And first of all,
what I'm going to do is I'm going to
check if there are any sort of pods
running on AWS Kubernetes cluster. So,
actually there are couple of pods. So,
what I'm going to do is I need to
delete. So, I have just uh I have just
uh
you know, deployed the Spring Boot
application. So, what I'm going to do is
cube cuddle.
Okay?
And oops, cube cuddle over here. And I'm
going to say delete {hyphen} f. And I'm
going to say k8s
uh and AWS {slash} app one
hello. Okay? App one hello. And I'll say
enter.
Okay?
Now, this will delete the deployment and
everything from the name spaces.
Right? You can see this is being
deleted. Now, before running this
command also make sure that you are in
the root of the project directory. Okay?
Because from the current directory you
are referring to k8s AWS app one hello.
Okay? So, you should be in your project
directory, which means you should be
over here in DevOps masterclass. All
right? Only then you can refer to the
files this way. Okay? And if you see
uh I'm in uh I'm here.
Okay? I'm in the root of the directory.
So, this is deleted. Okay? I've deleted
the application that I had deployed. And
this was for the Spring Boot
application. Okay? This is deleted. Now,
what I will do is I will implement CI/CD
for the Node.js application. And what I
want you all to do is I want you all to
take this up as a challenge. Yes, as a
challenge.
See, I'll be showing you how you can
deploy.
But, it's best you take this as a
challenge on your own because you've
already seen one pipeline being deployed
automatically. Right? So, pause the
video right now. Attempt this as a
challenge. Remember the goal of all the
challenges I give is not to get the
right answer.
It's to uh get out of your comfort zone.
It's to get from watching mode to that
of doing mode. Only then you become a
great software engineer.
Pause the video right now.
Welcome back. I hope you all had a
chance to attempt this challenge. Now,
I'm going to give you the solution for
this challenge. So, Node.js CI I already
have in place over here.
And this CI is basically responsible uh
for it basically it triggers on push on
main and at this particular path. It
also has workflow dispatch and it has
two jobs. One is to build and test the
application. We build the application
this way. We run the test. Okay? And it
is also building the application and
pushing the Docker image to the Docker
Hub repository. Okay. So, these two I
have. Now, I can modify this particular
pipeline itself, but I'm not going to
modify. I'm going to instead create a
new pipeline, new workflow because I
don't want to touch that thing over
there. Okay? So, I'm going to say CI _
CT over here.
Okay?
And here
deploy
uh your hello Node app to
AWS EKS. This is done.
Okay?
So, this is done and then over here,
what we need is we need the steps for
deployment. So, what I'm going to do is
I'm going to come over here.
Okay? And here, I'm going to copy this
entire thing like deploy AWS EKS. Okay,
this entire thing. So, it will be the
same thing. Okay? I'll just paste it
over here. Okay? It's not going to be
different. Okay, you can see it's being
deployed here. Like all the steps will
be same. For example, checking out the
code
then configuring AWS credentials. Okay?
We already have these access key and
secret access key set up.
Setting up Cube Cattle.
Updating Cube config. This is also going
to be same. Verifying the connection and
then finally deploying it to AWS. Now,
what we need to do is we need to check
this particular file.
So, here app.yaml and here we will have
the image for spring. So, I'm going to
update this image to that of node.
Okay. And instead of you know, embark X,
I think we need over here
what we need? We need over here uh
the code 007, something like this. Okay?
This is what I'm going to need.
So, make sure that
the this particular thing points
to the pipeline over here.
Okay? So, this particular
configuration points to the uh
the image that we are building. Okay?
Make sure you do that. So, just do this
and then you come over here. This all is
done. Okay, this is fine.
I'll save this. Okay? And let us commit
this code.
So, I'm going to open up the terminal
over here. Okay?
And here I'm going to say get add like
so and then I'm going to add the commit.
So, instead of hello spring, this is
going to be hello node.
Okay? That is the commit message I want
to add and I'm going to say get push.
Now, the moment you push, okay? Here
if you come to the repo
here.
Okay? Let me go back.
And let me see if this is triggered
automatically. Ideally, it should
trigger automatically. Let me see all
the workflows.
Okay.
All right, it's not yet triggered
automatically. Let Let me do a refresh.
Okay, what's the problem?
Let me see here.
Okay, this is pushed.
So, if you see over here
So, let me go to hello node app.
Okay. So, it's not triggered because
there were no changes in the paths that
were mentioned. So, but we luckily have
run like workflow dispatch added. So,
I'll just run this workflow. And let us
wait
to see this happen. Okay. Now, what I
This should ideally do is this should
push
the image to
Docker Hub over here.
Okay, here. Hello node should have the
latest update. So, you can see last push
over here for my repo was 2 days ago.
Okay. Let us see if we get the latest
update over here. So, I'll just go to
this particular workflow. It's getting
triggered. You can see the building
building and testing of application is
completed in 10
seconds.
Now, it's doing Docker build and push.
We'll wait until this finishes.
Okay.
So, ideally this should also finish
successfully and without any issues
because this CI pipeline was working
fine.
We What we have added new is the CD
pipeline. Okay.
So, here you can see this push process
is done and now let us see if this is
done as well.
Okay, so we'll wait for a while.
Deployment is in process. So, build step
took 28 seconds and until then deploy
AWS EKS was not triggered because this
is dependent on the previous step. So,
you can see over here this is done
successfully. You can check if there was
a new build that was pushed. If you
refresh,
you'll see last push was 1 minute ago.
Can you see? Last push 1 minute ago.
Yes.
And now, if you see
this is also successful. All right, and
there should be some pods running.
So, what you can do is I'll say clear.
I'll say cube cuddle
get pods over here like so. You can see
two pods running.
I can get the service URL for me to
access.
Right? I'll just copy this.
I'll copy
and I'll come over here
and let us try to access this. Okay.
I'm going to try and access this was for
the Spring Boot application. Now, this
is for the Node.js application. Okay.
This is not yet up. See, if you try to
access it immediately, it might not be
up because there is provisioning that
happens on AWS like creating load
balancers, setting up the URL, all of
that happens. So, if you are not seeing
the output, it's likely that the
provisioning step is in process.
So, just wait for a couple of minutes,
and then you should see the output.
Okay, it's not yet working, and I found
the reason for this. The reason is here
we added Node.js image, right, in the
YAML file, the Kubernetes configuration
YAML file. We added Node.js image, but
Node.js is not running on 8080, okay?
It was Spring Boot application that was
running on 8080. This one is running on
3000. So, I'll update this to 3000, and
also the target port over here for
service of service will be 3000. Now,
once we make these changes,
ideally, it should work. Let me see if
there is anything else missing.
It should work, okay? And let me come
over here,
and uh let me
trigger the workflow again. So, I'll
come over here,
and I'll say run the workflow again. Let
us retrigger the workflow, and this time
it should properly run.
So, let us wait. The workflow has
triggered.
All the workflow.
If you go over here, you should be able
to So, I'll wait for a while until this
entire process completes.
So, you can see over here, the entire
build process is complete. If you go
over here, you would see
last push was also there 1 minute ago.
And let us come over here, and let us
refresh. Okay, so now you can see
the Node application is also deployed to
AWS. So, imagine now you doing some
changes in the code,
and you're pushing the code, and it's
auto deployed to AWS with the help of
this CI/CD pipeline. Isn't this an
amazing feeling? We did one mistake.
Yes, the port wiring was not correct.
So, here we changed the image from
Spring Boot to Node.js. For Spring Boot,
it's 8080 for the container port, and
hence the target port was 8080. But, for
Node.js, since the within the container,
Spring a Node.js app is running on 3000,
so you need to make sure the container
port is also 3000 and target port is
also 3000. Only then it will work
properly.
I hope this is making sense and I hope
you are able to have some fun. Also, if
you want to delete this now, so what you
can do is like you delete it
the previous app, okay? You can delete
something like this. Delete {hyphen} f.
And if you delete it like this, you can
see both are deleted now. It will take a
bit to complete this command, but this
is going to be deleted from the name
space, okay? And uh you can then deploy
something else if you don't want this
app there,
okay? So, this is deleted. Okay, it's
it's not yet giving me the prompt to
write,
but that's okay.
I'll wait for a while until the deletion
is complete. Okay, see the deletion is
complete and now if you try to get pods,
they won't be
This is in the terminating status, okay?
So, they are actually being deleted.
It's not yet fully deleted, but they're
in the terminating status now. Earlier,
they were in the running status as you
can see,
right? And if you try to get service
also, it will be
Okay, it's it's gone, right? So, so
yeah, the deletion process has been
successful and we have been able to we
we have seen how you can deploy and uh
work with Node JS app. I hope this has
been useful.
All right, so now it's time where uh we
start deploying our Python application
to Kubernetes using CI/CD. All right?
And what I'm going to do is here, if you
come, I'm going to check if uh any sort
of pods or anything are running. There
are no pods running. If there is
anything running, you need to delete
that. So, what I'm going to do here, uh
if you go to Docker, you have this
Python code over here, okay? And the
Python app is running on port 3000, so
that is good, okay?
And uh we already have the Kubernetes
configuration also defined here,
right? This is a Kubernetes
configuration for Node JS app. And of
course Node.js app also runs on 3000.
So, this is configured to work on 3000.
Now, what I will do is I'll first update
the image over here. This image will be
for Python hello Node. Sorry, not hello
Node. It will be hello Python. So, here
if you come
if you go to hello Python
you can see this is what it should
replicate because the your image will be
pushed over here by the CI/CD pipeline,
right? So, we have added that. Now, we
have I'll save this.
And then I'll come to like get a folder
here and then let's take a look at the
Python CI over here. So, I already have
a CI written for Python. I'm going to
duplicate that because that is the same
file that I'll use for writing the CD
code as well, which is continuous
deployment, like so.
Okay. I'll update the name deploying
like hello Python to AWS EKS, like so.
And here if you see uh we have like the
trigger configured. Okay, so any sort of
changes here in this particular path
this is going to trigger.
And we have workflow dispatch also, so
we can run this manually. Now, there are
two jobs. One is build and test, so this
will build and test the Python
application.
And then we have Docker build and push,
which is going to build the image for
this particular application after
building and testing. And it's going to
make a Docker image and then it's going
to push it to your Docker Hub account.
Okay.
Now, we need to add the AWS part over
here. So, what I'm going to do is here I
already have the CI/CD written for Node.
Okay.
So, I can copy this.
I can copy the deploy AWS EKS part
completely.
And I'll paste it over here.
Okay.
Some somewhere over here. Okay.
And
yeah, this is done. So, rest everything
remains the same. Okay.
So, we will be deploying on EKS. We'll
check out the code first, okay? This job
depends on the previous step or the
previous job.
We'll check out the code first, then
we'll configure the AWS credentials.
Then we'll set up Cube Cuttle, then
we'll update the Cube config for EKS.
Then we'll verify the connection, and
then we'll deploy to AWS. That's fine.
And now, I will just do
uh just I'll open the new terminal.
Okay?
And I'm going to see over here.
Here,
I'm going to
commit, okay? So, I'll have to commit.
So, let me first add everything. So,
I'll say get add.
And
then I'll have to commit here. So, I'll
say
oops, so get add didn't work properly.
So, I'll have to say get add and then
dot.
And now, I'll have to commit.
Okay?
So, to commit, I'm going to say
hello
Python
CI/CD, like so.
Right?
And you can see the commit was done, and
I'll do a get push. Okay? So, everything
is being pushed now.
Okay?
And this is Remember, this is for the
Python app. So, I'll come over here.
And uh here, I will just trigger the
workflow. So, if I refresh here,
you can see hello Python app to EKS.
This is not triggered because there it's
configured to trigger only if there are
changes in a particular path on the
repo. So, it won't trigger. So, I'm just
going to run this manually. Let us see
how this runs.
And uh we'll soon have a workflow appear
over here.
Okay?
So, the goal of this is basically to
build the application in an automated
way
uh to build the image and then to get it
deployed onto the production. So, you
can see the building and testing of the
Python app is done.
Docker build push is happening. So, if
you come over here, last push was 2 days
ago.
Okay?
So, let us wait until this push is done.
It should be done now. Okay, won't take
much time to push this app.
I think let me refresh.
You can see the last push was done less
than a minute ago. You can see over
here. Right? So, push is done. You can
see it's successful.
And then now it is deploying to AWS EKS.
Right? So, we'll wait for a while until
the deployment completes. It's not going
to take much time.
But yeah, you can see services and
everything have been created.
And see, all done.
Right? So, here now if you check for
pods, it's going to work.
Right? What I will do is I'll get the
service.
Okay.
Now, you get this service URL. So, you
are supposed to copy that and then
you are supposed to So, here this won't
work.
But here I will paste this URL. The URL
that I've got in a fresh way. Okay. This
will take a bit of time because the load
balancer and everything will get
provisioned. We'll wait for a bit until
we see
This I made for a couple of minutes.
So, after waiting for a couple of
minutes, you can see now we have the
Python app also running. You can see.
Right? This is fun, right? So, remember
if you wish to delete, you can simply
delete it something like this.
Right? Just run this command and it's
going to be deleted.
Right? And if you come over here,
now it's being deleted. If you refresh,
okay, and still it's still accessible.
Okay, it's not accessible now. It's
gone. Right? So, I should see cannot
access page.
Okay? But yeah, it's deleted and uh here
also you can see the confirmation.
Right? So, it's deleted.
Okay, it's it's not accessible. You can
see it's in continuous loading state.
So, yeah, I hope this is clear and I
hope you all have been able to follow
along.
Now, after you are done deploying and uh
working with all the services on AWS,
It's important that you clean up
everything. And the reason it's
important for the cleanup is
so that you can avoid surprise bills,
invoices from AWS. So here, what you
need to do is I'm going to say EKS
CTL. So we are going to make use of EKS
control delete.
Okay, cluster and I'm going to say
region.
So my region for my cluster was AP
hyphen south hyphen one. And I'm going
to mention the name as hello cluster.
Cluster, like so. Okay, so this is
really important. Now what this is going
to do is it's going to delete everything
like like EKS control plane, node
groups, load balancers, security groups,
everything that has been created, IAM
roles uh for this to work well. All of
this is going to be deleted with this
particular uh single command.
Of course, this does a lot of cleanup
that
So see, there was a lot of setup that
was done when you created the cluster.
Cluster creation itself takes like 5 10
minutes minimum.
Right? So of course, there were so many
things created on AWS. Now those need to
be cleaned up. So this is also going to
take good amount of time. It'll take 5
10 minutes at least. So just hang in
there. Okay? And wait for it to finish.
So I'll wait over here
and I'll get this finished. So you will
get the confirmation in the end, okay,
that it has been deleted. I hope this
has been useful.
So I also wanted to mention that this
particular course is a part of
full-fledged course that is available
here on Udemy and you can get the
discounts coupon for this particular
course here on our website, the link for
which you will find in the description
below. Don't go directly and buy the
course, but you should claim the
discount coupon for being a viewer of
our channel. So you will find a discount
coupon below.
Uh you'll find the link and just head
over to this website and if you click on
enroll now, you will get the latest
coupon applied the link with the latest
coupon applied. So just click over here
and this link will take you to Udemy
with the best coupon available at that
particular point in time. Now talking
about the course, this course is right
now the best seller in its category and
as I'm recording the video, it has just
launched. Okay, and it is part of Udemy
for business subscription as well. So
Udemy courses you know, like you can get
it for very
low price. We believe in affordable
education and yes,
this course is around roughly 40 hours.
Okay, I'm adding more and more content
every now and then. So people who are
enrolled into this particular course,
thank you very much for the trust and
you all know like how I'm updating the
content like right? So
there is new releases happening every
now and then. So this length increases
with latest industry trends and
technologies whatever is happening in
the world. I keep on updating the
courses and right now you can see this
course stands strong with roughly 40
hours. It's so it's totally it's total
40 hours right now in length. It's
massive. It deserves a lot of or it
demands a lot of commitment from you,
but it delivers the skill and this is
something that you can get from the
ratings and the best seller tag that it
has. Now remember
being a best seller in this niche on a
platform like Udemy is not a joke. Okay,
there are so many courses that are
competing for the spot, but good content
always finds the way. Okay, so just head
over to this website and this website is
a markets.com. Also, I'll talk a little
bit more about this course. So here you
can see this is the course. So by the
way, from the title you will see full
stack AI devops masterclass. So why are
we calling this course as full stack
course because in this particular
course, we learn how to deploy full
stack applications, right? We we learn
how to do devops on full stack
application. Full stack meaning front
end as well as back end. We don't build
the application, but we learn how to
perform DevOps, right? Then AI.
I've not added AI as a marketing tactic
over here, okay? Because every other
course you see, they add AI in the
headline, but that's not the case here.
You learn AI driven DevOps as well, AI
assisted DevOps as well. You learn how
to make use of DevOps to
uh im- You learn how to im- make use of
AI to improve on your DevOps workflow.
So, that is also covered, so that is why
AI comes over here. DevOps, of course,
because it's a DevOps course. Real
projects because we give you access to
some real projects. So, we give access
to monolith application and also
microservices. I'll talk about that.
Microservice access is also given. You
get a ready-made application, a full
stack application built in microservices
architecture.
And you can
do uh like everything, like deployment,
uh containerization, Kubernetes
deployment, you know, deploying it to
cloud. So, all of that you learn how you
can manage configurations. All of that
is covered. And yes, this is the first
course, I would say, that covers all the
three major technologies. Uh sorry,
major cloud platforms, I would say. AWS,
Azure, and GCP. These three in
combination in a single course are rare,
okay? At least I have not seen.
And uh yeah, at an unbelievable price.
So,
we had to keep this on Udemy, okay?
Because we believe in affordable
education and trust me, the price at
which you get this course for, this
course delivers far more than that,
okay? I can promise this to you, okay?
So, so you can go and check the reviews
as well and you can check the
curriculum, but what all we cover over
here? So, we understood the title. Why
uh why we have this kind of title over
here, okay? We have microservices as
well over here. Okay? So, first this
course starts with DevOps mindset. Then
we head over to Docker. So we
containerize the application and when we
talk about containerization, we just
don't containerize monolith application.
We containerize microservices and then
we learn how to go full stack. Okay,
then we learn about Kubernetes. Okay.
And we learn how to make use of
Kubernetes and deploy your application
to Kubernetes. So monolith,
microservice, and full stack again.
Okay. And also I'll tell you, okay,
looking at these keywords, I I know a
lot of beginners will get overwhelmed,
but don't worry if you've never heard of
Docker for example. If you've never
heard of DevOps, you don't know what
DevOps is, then this course is still for
you. So I forgot to mention one thing,
this course is for absolute beginners.
Okay. In fact, it is targeted towards
developers
and also DevOps engineers who are
breaking into this field. So I literally
start, so look at the first lecture that
you see over here. Okay. You
You learn first what is DevOps.
What is DevOps? That is where we start.
Okay. And then we start with Docker.
Okay, so if you've never heard of these
terms, don't worry about them. Okay. You
just enroll and just start taking
lectures in a daily manner and you will
learn all these terminologies. So I was
talking about Kubernetes. If you've
never heard of Kubernetes, we have that
covered inside the course. You
After the course completes, you will not
only learn what is Kubernetes, but you
will also know how you can deploy manage
applications on Kubernetes. What are
pods? You will understand if you're a
developer. See, if you're a developer,
what major challenge is today?
Developers can't interact uh with DevOps
engineers. They can interact, but they
don't understand that terminologies that
they're using. So this course equips you
with that. Okay. You learn that
terminologies, you understand the
terminologies, and you can communicate
with DevOps engineers with ease. Okay.
So So that's something there. You So
first we set up Kubernetes locally and
then we take Kubernetes to the cloud.
Okay, so you learn how to deploy
applications in cloud on Kubernetes
infrastructure. And we cover all three
cloud providers over here like GCP, AWS,
and Azure. Okay? And yes, we also cover
infrastructure as code. So, ISC means
infrastructure as code. So, this is
covered using Terraform. So, see,
infrastructure provisioning is a part,
okay? And um
you know, these days infrastructure can
be provisioned with the help of code.
And how it is provisioned, that is
something really, really important that
you need to understand. So, all of that
is covered in a hands-on manner. See, I
deliver courses that are hands-on. Okay?
I believe in learning hands-on. I don't
believe in theoretical and you know,
mugged up learning. I don't believe in
that. And that is
what my courses also reflect. Okay? So,
if you take a look at all the learners,
okay? Or if you take some sort of
feedback from all the learners who have
graduated from my courses, you will know
that courses delivered by us at
EmbaarkX, okay?
These courses are hands-on. We talk
about real things. We build real things.
So, that's that's what we deliver on.
And yes, Udemy as a platform is awesome.
Okay? We have the courses hosted there
and you can you can come over here on
embaarkx.com. You'll find all these
links in the description below, by the
way. Okay? So, you have we have this
uh Spring Boot road map. Oh, sorry.
Spring Boot uh course over here, which
is the flagship course available on
Udemy. Okay? And then we have our
microservices course. Okay? This is also
a flagship course hosted on Udemy. These
are all bestsellers. And they're
bestsellers for a reason. Okay? And uh
so so, that's there. And if you
if you wish to know the road map, okay?
Or if you're not sure as a beginner or
in which order you should take our
courses in, so you can go to
embaarkx.com, okay? And you can say
{slash} road map over here. So, So, will
get access to this road map, and it will
give you a complete understanding. Okay,
you should enroll if So, it give it will
give you complete understanding of which
course you should you should take when.
Okay, so it starts with this full-stack
professional e-commerce master class.
It's a full-stack course that teaches
you how to build professional e-commerce
grade applications using Spring Boot. We
cover React, JavaScript, everything
inside the course. Everything is
covered. You just need to know Java,
object-oriented programming basic
knowledge of Java. You just come inside
the course, and we take you through.
Right? Spring Boot Microservices is the
next, okay, which I just spoke about,
and then full-stack DevOps
for software engineers. So, this is a
course. So, yeah, I hope you all will
leverage the coupon code, the lowest
price coupon code that I'm sharing on
the website. The link for the same is in
the description below. Feel free to
take a look at the discount, and then
decide. A lot of people
A lot of people have already enrolled,
and the feedback has been tremendous.
Okay, this can help you take your career
to the next level. Okay? All the best.